TIIE SERMONS OF HOSEA
§ 14. The Superscription to Hosea's Sermons, Hos. 11
THE WORD OF JEHOVAH TO HOSEA THE SON OF BEERI
IN THE DAYS OF UZZIAH, JOTHAM, AIIAZ, AND HEZEKIAH, KINGS OF JUDAH
AND
IN THE DAYS OF JEROBOAM, SON OF JOASH, KING OF ISRAEL.
81
15. The Harlotry of Hosea's Wife and Her Punishment,
Hos. 12-9, 221,, e, 4 5a,h 31.,
THE BEGINNING OF JEHOVAH'S REVELATION BY HOSEA
Hos. 12b
Now Jehovah said to Hosea:
Go marry a wife with whorish instincts who will bear you children by her
whoredom,
For the land is continually going a-whoring from after Jehovah.
'So he went and married Gomer, the daughter of Dibliam.
And when she conceived and bore him a son, 'Jehovah said :
Call his name `Jezreel,'
For yet a little while
And I will avenge the blood shed at Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,
And I will cause the kingdom of Israel to cease.
'And it shall come to pass in that day,
That I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.
6And when she conceived again and bore a daughter, he said to him:
Call her name `Unpitied,
For I will no longer
Have pity on the house of Israel.
That I should still spare them.
Then she weaned Unpitied ; and when she conceived and bore a son, He
said:
Call his name, Not-my-people:
For ye indeed are not my people,
And I indeed am not your God.'
Then Hosea said: 
I will put away Gomer,
For she is not my wife,
And I will not be her husband;
And on her children I will have no pity,
Since they are children of whoredom,
For their mother hath become a harlot,
She who conceived them hath behaved shamefully.
3 But Jehovah said to me:
Still go, lover [this] woman,
Who loves a paramour and is an adulteress,
As Jehovah loveth the Israelites,
Although they turn to other gods,
And love raisin-cakes.'
'So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces° of silver and eight bushels(' of barley and a measurer of barley .c1
'And I said to her:
Many days shalt thou abide for me,
Thou shall not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be any man's wife, Yet, I, on my part will be thine.r
83
Tor through many days
The Israelites shall abides
Without king and without prince, Without sacrifice and without pillar,t Without ephodu and without. teraphim.
'Afterward the Israelites shall return', and seek Jehovah their God and David their king'. and they shall come trembling. to Jehovah and his goodness', at the end of days.
§ 16. Israel's Harlotry and Punishment, Hos. 22., a, e, 3, sc-t7, 13e, 23
Hos. 2 'a, d' e. 
Strive with your mother, strive,
That she put her acts of whoredom from her sight,
And her adulteries from between her breasts,
Lest I strip her naked,
And set her as she was on the day of her birth,
And make her like the wilderness,
And let her become like a parched land,
And let her die of thirst.
5c-e For she bath said,
`I will go after my paramour
Who gave me my bread and my water,
My wool, my flax, my oil, and my drink.'
84
°Therefore I am going to hedge up her ways with thorns, 
And build a wall about her, 
So that she cannot find her paths. 
'And she will pursue her paramours,z 
But will not overtake them, 
And she will seek and not find them.a 
'But she herself did not know 
That it was I who gave her 
The corn, the sweet wine, and the oil.b
'Therefore I will take back my corn in its time,
And my sweet wine in its season,
And I will withdraw my wool and my flax,
Given to cover her nakedness;
"And so I will uncover her shame,c
And none shall deliver her out of my hand.
"And I will lay waste her vines and her fig-trees ,d
Of which she bath said, ' These are my rewards
Which my lovers have given me.'
And I will make them a thicket,
And the wild beasts shall devour them.
"And I will also cause all her mirth to cease,e
Her feasts, her new moon, and her sabbaths.t
"And thus will I visit upon her the days of the Baalim,g
In which she made offerings') to them,
And decked herself with ear-rings and jewels,
And went after her paramours,
And forgot me, is the oracle of Jehovah.
"Therefore I am going to allure her,
And bring her into the wilderness,
And speak endearingly to her.'
"And I will give her from there her vineyards,
And the valley of Achori as a door of hope,
And there she shall respond as in the days of her youth,
As in the days when she came up from the land of Egypt.
"And it shall be in that day, is the oracle of Jehovah,
She shall call to her husband,
And shall call no more to the Baalim.k
"And I will remove the name of the Baitlim from her mouth,
And they shall no more be mentioned by their names.
"'And I will betroth her to me forever,
"Yea, I will betroth hers to me in righteousness,
And in judgment, and in kindness, and in mercy,
"Yea, I will betroth her to me in faithfulness and she shall know
Jehovah!°
"And it shall come to pass in that day,
That I will speak,n—it is the oracle of Jehovah,—
I will speak to the heavens,
And they will speak to the earth.
22And the earth will speak to the grain,
And the new wine and the oil:
And they shall speak to Jezreel,°
And I will sow her in the land.
23And I will have pity upon the unpitied,
And I will say to Not-my-people, 'Thou art my people,'
And they will say, 'Thou art my God.'P
86
§ 17. Later Predictions of Israel's Ultimate Restoration, Hos. 218.-d, 110-21
HOS. 2 1"-dAnd I will make for them a covenant in that day,  With the wild beasts, and the birds of the heavens and the creeping things of the earth,  And the bow and the sword and war I will completely destroy from out the land, And I will make them lie down in safety.
1 16And the number of the Israelites shall be as the sand of the sea,  Which cannot be measured or numbered;  And instead of its being said of them, 'Ye are not my people,'  They shall be called, 'The sons of the living God.' 
',And the Judahites and the Israelites shall be gathered together,q  And they shall appoint for themselves one head, and they shall go up out of the land,  For great shall he the day of Jezreel.r 
2 'Say ye to your brother, 'My people' and to your sister, 'Pitied'.a 
§ 18. Jehovah's Charge against Israel and Her Guilty Priests and Princes,
Hos. 4
Hos. 4 'Hear the word of Jehovah, 0 Israelites,
For Jehovah hath a charge against the inhabitants of the land,
For there is no fidelity, nor true love,
Nor knowledge of God in the land,
'But perjury, lying, and murder,
Stealing, committing adultery, and deeds of violcnce,t
And acts of bloodshed quickly follow each other.0
'Therefore the land mourns,
And all its inhabitants languish,
Together with the wild beasts and the birds of the heavens,
While even the fish of the sea are swept away,
87
4Yet let none bring charges,
And let none reprove,
Since my people are but as their priestlings,v
50 priest, thou shalt stumble by day,"
And the prophet also shall stumble with thee,
By night I will destroy thy people.
'Thy people are being destroyed for lack of knowledge.
Because thou hast rejected knowledge,
I reject thee from being priest to me.
Since thou hast forgotten the instruction of thy God,
I also will forget thy children.
'The more they increased the more they sinned against me,
They' have changed their glory for shame.
'They feed on the sin of my people,
And they lust after their guilt.
'Thus it comes to be, like people, like priest,
But I will visit upon each punishment for his ways,
And their deeds I will requite to them.
"For they shall eat and not be satisfied,
They shall play the harlot and not find satisfaction,Y
Because they have ceased to heed Jehovah.
'Harlotry and sweet wine take away the understanding;z
'My people ask counsel of their wood,
And their staff makes known to them their oracle!'
For a spirit of harlotry has led them astray,
So that they have played the harlot from after their God.
uOn the heights of the mountains they sacrifice,
And on the hills they burn their offerings,b
Under oaks and poplars and terebinths,
For their shade is pleasant!
Therefore your daughters play the harlot,
And your brides commit adultery.
 14I will not punish your' daughters because they play the harlot,  Nor your brides because they commit adultery,
88
And sacrificed with consecrated prostitutes;d Thus the stupid people come to ruin!
15Thoug,h thou play the harlot, Israel,
Let not Judah become guilty,
And do not come to Gilgal
And do not go up to Beth-avem.-
And do not swear [at Beershehabl 'As Jehovah liveth.'g
'Yea, like a stubborn heifer,
Israel has behaved stubbornly,
Can Jehovah now feed him,
As he would a lamb in a broad pasture?"
'Ephraim' is wedded to idols;] leave him alone!
'8A band of topers! They gave themselves up to harlotry;k
They love shamel more than honor."
'9A wind-storm shall envelop them in its wings,"
And they shall be ashamed of their altars.°
§ 19. The Guilt of Priests and Princes, Hos. 5'-'4
Hos. 5 'Hear this, 0 priests,
And hearken, 0 house of Israel,
And, 0 house of the king, give heed;
Since for you is the judgment.
A snare have you become at Mizpeh,
And a net spread out on Tabor,
2And a deep pit have they dug at Shittim,
And there is no correction for any of them?'
'I indeed know Ephraim,
And Israel is not hid from me,
For thou,q 0 Ephraim, hast played the harlot,
Israel is defiled.
89
'Their deeds do not permit them,
To return to their God,
For the spirit of harlotry is within them,
And Jehovah they do not know.
'Therefore Israel's pride shall testify to his face,
And Ephraim' shall stumble through his guilt.
Judahs also shall stumble with them.
°With their sheep and their cattle, they shall go about
To seek Jehovah, but shall not find hinl,t
'For they have been untrue to Jehovah,
Since they have begotten alien children;
A new moon' may destroy them with their portions.
8Blow the trumpet in Gibeah,
The clarion in Ramah,
Raise the alarm in Bethel,"
Make Benjamin trernble,w
°F,phraim shall become a desolation
In the (lay of punishment,
Concerning the tribes of Israel I make known what is certain.
"The princes of Israelx have become,
Like those who remove the landmarks 33'
Upon them I will pour out my wrath like water.
"Ephraim practises oppression and crushes right,s
For he is determined to go after vanity.a
"But I am like a moth to Ephraim, Like rottenness to the house of Israel; "For when Ephraim saw his sickness; And Israelb his sore,
Ephraim went to Assyria
And Israele to the great kine
But he cannot heal you,
Nor relieve you of your wound.
"For I myself will be like a lion to Ephraim,
And like a young lion to the house of Israel.
I, even I, will rend and go my way,
I will carry off and none shall rescue.
§ 20. The Fatal Lack of True Repentance and Reform, Hos. 515-77
Hos. 5 'I will return to my place,e
Until they are confoundedf and seek my presence.
When they are in distress they will quickly seek me,
6 'Saying, ' Come let us return to Jehovah,
For he bath torn and he will heal us,
Ile bath smitten and he will bind us up,
'He will revive in a couple of days,
On the third day he will raise us up again,
That we may live in his presence.
'Yea, let us know, let us eagerly seekg to know Jehovah,
As soon as we quickly seekh him,
Then he will come to us as the winter rain,
As the spring rain that waters the earth.'
'What can I make of you, 0 Ephraim!
What can I make of you, 0 Israel!'
Since your love is like a morning cloud,
Yea, like the dew which early goes away)
'Therefore I have hewn them by the prophets,
91
I have slain themk by the words of my mouth. And my judgment is like the light that goes forth, 'For it is love that I delight in and not sacrifice, And knowledge of God and not burnt-offerings.
'But they after the manner of men' have transgressed the covenant,
There they have played me false.
8Gileadm is a city of evil-doers,
Tracked with bloody footprints,
2And as bandits lie in wait for a man,
So a band of priests murder on the way to Shechem;°
Verily they commit deliberate crime.
"In Bethel° I have seen a horrible thing ,P
There Ephraim plays the harlot;
Israel is defiled.
"Judah for thee also a harvest is set.4
When I would turn,r 7 'when I would heal Israel,
Then Ephraini's guilt is revealed,
And Samaria's crimes [are seen]:s
How they practise fraud and the thief enters in,
While abroad bandits plunder.
2But they never think in their hearts,
That all their wickedness I remember.'
Now their deeds have encompassed them,
They are ever before my face.
2In their wickedness they anoint kings,'"
And in their falsehood princes,
'Since they are all of them adulterers.v
2By clay"' they make our king sick,
And the princes with fever from wine,
He stretches forth his hand with dissolute fellows,
'For like an oven their heart burns with treachery,`
All night theirs' anger slumbers,
In the morning it blazes into a flame of fire.
7A11 of them glow like an oven,
And they devour their rulers,
All their kings have fallen.
There is none among them who calls to me.
21. Evidences of the Nation's Degeneracy and Approaching Dissolution,
Hos. 78-83
Hos. 7 'Ephraim—he lets himself be mixed among the peoples, Ephraim—he has become a cake unturned.z
9Strangersa have devoured his strength, but he does not know it; Also gray hairsb are sprinkled upon him, but he knows it not, "And Israel's pride° has testified to his face:
Yet they do not return to Jehovah their God,
And in all this they seek him not.
11Ephraim is like a simple, silly dove:
To Egypt they call, after Assyria they go,
'As often as they go away, I will spread over them my net,
Like birds of the heavens I will bring them down;
I will chastise them because of their wickedness;d
"Woe to them, that they have strayed from me!
Destruction to them, because they have been untrue to me.
Although it was I who redeemed them, they spoke lies about me, 'And they have never cried to one with their heart,  But they are ever howling beside their altars for corn and new wine,  They cut cut themselves,e they rebel against me,  'Although it was I who trained and strengthened their arms, Concerning me they plan only evil, "they turn to Baal,g
They have become like a bow that swerves,h
 Their princes shall fall by the sword,
 Because of the insolence of their tongues.i
 In the land of Egypt, S 'they will lick the dust)
 For as an eagle I will swoop down upon my house,k
Because they have transgressed my covenant,
And trespassed against my law.,
'To me they continually cry,
'My God, we Israel, know thee'
'Israel has spurned that which is good,
Let the foe pursue him.
§ 22. Jehovah's Repudiation of Israel's Rulers and Idols, Hos. 84-11
Hos. S They themselves have made kings but without my consent,
They have made princes but without my knowledg
,e,"I
Out of their silver and gold, they have made idols to their de-
struction!°
5b, °Mine auger is kindled against them,
How long will they escape punishment ?
saThy calf, 0 Samaria,° is distasteful,"
'For from Israel it is also;
A workman made and it is not good;q
Like splinters' shall Samaria's calf become.
'For they sow the wind and reap a whirlwind;
A shoot which has no stalk and yields no fruitP
If it should yield, strangers would devour it.
91
'Israel is devoured; already it is among the nations,
As a vessel in which there is no pleasure.
°For by themselves they have gone up to Assyria,
As a wild-ass which goes apart by itself.t
Ephraim gives love-gifts;
'And if they give themselves among the nations,
I must now scatter them,u
That they may cease a little front anointing kings and princes.v
'For as many altars as Ephraim has erected,w They are to him altars for sinning,
'Were I to write for him ever so many instructions,x
As those of a stranger would they be regarded. 13They love sacrifice y' and so they offer sacrifices,
Flesh, and so they eat it,
Although Jehovah is not pleased with them, Therefore he must now remember their guilt,
And punish their sins.
To Egypt must they return,=
"For Israel forgot his Maker,
And Judah built palaces,
Judah also multiplied fenced cities;
And so I will send fire upon her cities,
And it shall devour her palaces..
§ 23. The Horrors of the Coming Exile, Hos. 91.9
Hos. 9 'Rejoice not too loudly,b 0 Israel, like the heathen, For thou hast played the harlot, being untrue to thy God,c Thou hast loved a harlot's hire upon every threshing-fioond 2Threshing-fioor and wine-vat shall not know them,e And the new wine shall disown them.
'They shall not dwell in Jehovah's land,
95
But Ephraim shall return to Egypt,
And in Assyria they shall eat what is unclean.
4They shall not pour out libations of wine to Jehovah,
Nor prepare for him their sacrifices,
Theirf bread shall be like the bread of mourning;
All who eat it shall defile themselves,
For their bread shall be only for their hunger,
It shall not come into Jehovah's temple.
5What will ye do on the day of the festival?4
Or on the day of Jehovah's feast ?
°For behold they will soon go to Assyria ,h
Egypt shall gather them, Memphis' shall bury them, Nettles shall take possession of their treasure of silver, Thorns shall come tip in their tents)
7The days of visitation are come,
The days of recompense are at hand,
The Israelitesk shall know,
[Who say], The prophet is a fool,
The inspired man is raving mad,'1
It is because of the greatness of thy iniquity and the greatness of
thy sin.m
8Ephraim acts the spy with my God,
A prophet finds the snares of a fowler are in all his ways;
In the house of his God they lay hostile plots,"
'They commit crimes as in the days of Gibeah,
[Jehovah] will remember their iniquity,
He will visit with punishment their sin.
96
§ 24. Israel's Corrupt Religious Practices and the Inevitable Judgment,
Hos. 910-109
Hos. 9 "Like grapes in the wilderness I found Israel;`)
Like the first fruit on a fig-tree" I saw your fathers;
But as soon as they came to Baal-peor,q they consecrated themselves
to Baal,r
And became as abominable as the object of their love.
"Ephraim—like a bird his glory flies away ;
There shall be no more birth, no more motherhood, no more conception. "bYea, if they do bear children, I will slay the darlings of their womb ;s 'Even though they bring up their sons, I will bereave them until not a man is left.
Verily, woe to them when I look away from them.
"Ephraim—as I have seen, his sons are destined to be a prey,' Yea, Ephraim himself must lead forth his sons to slaughter. "Give them, 0 Jehovah—what wilt thou give ?
Give them' a miscarrying womb and dry breasts!'
'All their evil culminated in Gilgal,w yea, there I learned to hate them.
Because of the evil of their deeds I will drive them out of my house.
I will no longer love them, for all their nobles arc rebels. "'Ephraim is blighted, their root withered,'
17bAndY they shall become wanderers among the nations.
10' A luxuriant vine was Israel,' He bore fruita lavishly;
In proportion to the increase of his fruit he increased altars,
In proportion to the beauty of his land he made beautiful the pillars.
'Their heart is false,b
Now must they he punished;
Hey himself will break the neck of their altars,
He will destroy their pillars.
3Yea, soon they will be saying,
`We have no king,d
For we have not revered Jehovah,
And the king, what can he do for us ?'
'Speaking words, perjuring themselves, making agreements,
And litigation springs up like poppy in a plowed field.'
5For the calf° of Beth-avenh
The inhabitantsi of Samaria shall tremble,
Yea, his people shall mourn for him,
And his priestlingsj shall writhe for him,
For his glory, because it has departed from him."
°This also they will carry off to Assyria, As a present to the great king)
Disgrace shall Ephraim bear.
And Israel shall be ashamed of his idol.'
7As for Samaria, her king is cut off,
He is like a ship on the face of the waters.°
5And the high places of Israel° shall he destroyed, Thorns and thistles shall come upon their altars, And they shall say to the mountains, ' Cover us,' And to the hills, 'Fall upon us.'
93
§ 2,5. Whatsoever a Nation Soweth that Shall it also Reap, Hos. 1010-15
HOS. 10 9From the days of Gibeah is Israel's sin,
There they took their stand.
Shall not war overtake them in Gibeah?
Against the dastardsP 10! will come, and chastize them,q
And peoples shall be gathered against them,
To chastize them for their double eriines.r
11Ephraim indeed was a traineds heifer that loved to thresh, And I myself laid a yoke' upon his fair neck, I made Ephraim draw; he must plow;
Jacobi' must harrow for himself.
'Sow for yourselves righteousness,
Reap the fruits of love;
Break up your fallow ground;
For it is time to seek Jehovah,
To the end that the fruit of righteousness' may come to you.w
"But ye have plowed wickedness, iniquity have ye reaped;
Ye have eaten the fruit of lies.
Because thou hast trusted in chariots,x in the multitude of thy warriors,
"Therefore the alarm of war shall sound in thy cities
And all thy fortresses shall be ruined,
As Shahnanz laid in ruins Beth-arbel in the day of battle, The mother being dashed to pieces over her children. 15Thus will P do to you, 0 house of Israel,b
Because of the enormity of your wickedness,
In the dawne shall the king of Israel be utterly cut off.
§ 26. Jehovah's Fatherly Love and Care for His Faithless People, Hos. 11'-"
Hos. 11 'When Israel was young, then I began to love him,
And out of Egyptd I called his sons.°
'The more If called them,
The further they went away from me.
They kept sacrificing to Baalim
And making offerings to images.
'Yet it was Ig who taught Ephraim to walk,
Taking them up in my arms;h
But they did not know that I healed them;
'With humane cords] I ever drew them,
With bands of love.
And I was to them as one who lifts up the yoke from off their jaws,k
And bending toward' him, I gave him food to eat.
511e must return to the land of Egypt,m Or Assyria will he their king;
For they have refused to return' to me.
100
6Therefore the swords shall whirl in their cities,° And shall devour in theirs' fortresses,
'For my people are bent in rebelling against me, And upon the Baalim they call with one aceord.q
'How can I give thee up, 0 Ephraim! give thee over, 0 IsraelF
How am I to give thee up as Admah !s make thee like Zeboim!
My heart asserts itself,t
My sympathies are all aglow,u
91 will not carry into effect the fierceness of my anger,
I will not turn to destroy Ephraim,
For God am I, and not man,
Holy in the midst of thee, therefore I will not consume."
,oThey will follow after Jehovah;
Like a lion he will roar;
When he shall roar,
Sons from the west shall come hurriedly;
"They shall come hurriedly like the birds from Egypt,
And like doves from the land of Assyria.
And he will bring them back to their houses,
It lb the oracle of Jellovali,w
§ 27. Israel's Faithlessness from the First, Hos. 1112-1214
Hos
. 11 ''Ephraim has encompassed me with falsehood,
And the house of Israel with deceit, But Judah is still known with God, And faithful with the Holy Ones
12 'Ephraim herds the wind and hunts the sirocco,
All day long they heap up falsehood and fraud,Y And make a league with Assyria,
101
And carry oil' to Egypt.
2Jchovah bath a charge against Isracl,a
To punish Jacob for his acts,
According to his deeds will he requite him,
3ahl the womb he supplantedh his brother.
12And Jacob fled to the territory of Aram,'
And Israel served for a wife,
Yea, for a wife he herded sheep.
3bIn a man's strength he contended with God,d
,Iie contended' with the angel and prevailed,
He wept and besought mercy of him.
At Bethel Jehovah found him,,
And there he spoke with him."
BAnd Jehovah is the God of hosts,
Jehovah is his name,
Thus thou shouldst by the help of thy God return .b
'Keep true love and justice,
Wait on thy God without ceasing.,
'Canaanite!' In his hand are false balances; he loves to defraud;
Tor Ephraim says, ' Yes, I have become rich; I have secured wealth foi
myself,'k
All his gains' will not secure for him exemption for the guilt that he has in-
curred,
For I, Jehovah thy God, from the land of Egyptm
Will make thee again dwell in tents,' as in time days of old.°
"Yet I spoke continually by the prophets, And it was I who multiplied visions,
And spoke in parables through the prophets.
"And by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel up from Egypt, And by a prophet he was guarded.P
'Ephraim has given bitter provocation
His guilt of bloodshed his Lord" will leave upon'. him,
And for his reproach he will repay loins.
Gileads is iniquity, yea they have wrought vanity,
In Gilgal they sacrifice to demons;t
So their altars shall be as stone-heaps,
Among the furrows of the field.
2S. Jehovah's Final and Complete Destruction of the Guilty Nation,
Hos. 13
Hos. 13 'When Ephraim used to speak there was trembling;u
A prince was he in Israel.
But lie incurred guilt through Baal and died.
'And now they go on sinning;
They make for themselves molten gods—
From their silver, idols according to their own model;v
Smiths' work all of it!
To such they speak!w
Men who sacrifice' kiss calves!
'Therefore they shall be like the morning cloud,
Like the dew that early disappears,
Like the chaff which blows away from the threshing-floor, And like the smoke from the window.
'Yet it was I, Jehovah, thy God,
'Who brought thee up from the land of Egypt, And a God beside me thou knowest not, Nor has there been any saviour except me.
''It was I who shephcrdedz thee in the wilderness,
In the land of burning heat.
°As they fed, they were filled to the full,
They were filled to the full so that their heart was lifted up;
Therefore they forgot me!
'And so I will be to them like a lion, .Like a leopard will I lay in wait by the way, 'I will fall upon them like a bear robbed of its young, And will tear open that which encloses their hearts. And there the lions of the forest shall devour them)) And the wild beasts shall tear them in pieces.
'In the time of destruction, 0 Israel, who will help thee Pe
"Where is thy king now that he may deliver thee
And all thy princes that they may secure for thee justice :4
Those of whom thou least said,
`Give me kings and princes.'
"I give thee kings in my anger,
And take them away in my wrath.
'Ephrahn's iniquity is gathered up; his sin is laid by in store.e 13The pangs of childbirth come upon him, but he is an unwise child; For this is no time to stand in the mouth of the womb.]
"Shall I deliver them from the power of Sheol?
Shall I redeem them from death?
Come on with thy plagues, O death!
On with thy pestilence, O Sheol!
Relentingh is forever hid from mine eyes.
'Though he is flourishing in the midst of the reedgrass,' There shall come an east wind, Jehovah's wind,
Corning up from the wilderness; And his fountain shall dry up, And his spring shall be parched; While the foes shall strip the treasure, Consisting of all precious things.
'Samaria shall bear her guilt :k
For she has rebelled against her God.
They shall fall by the sword,
Their children shall be dashed to pieces,
And their women with child shall be ripped up.
j 29. Later Words of Exhortation and Promise, Hos. 141-8
Hos. 14 'Return, 0 Israel, to Jehovah thy God; For thou has stumbled through thine iniquity. 'Take words' with thee,
And return to Jehovah thy God.
Say to him:
Do thou wholly pardon iniquity and let us receive favor;rn And thus we will pay the fruit° of our lips;
3eFor in thee the orphan finds mercy.°
105
33-dAssyria will not save us;
We will not ride upon horses [to Egypt];P And we will no more say, 'Our God,' To the work of our hands.
4I will heal their apostasy, I will love them freely,q
Now that my anger is turned away from them, will be as dew to Israel.
He shall blossom as the lily,
And he shall strike in his roots like Lebanon.r And his saplings shall spread out,
'And his beauty shall be like that of the olive tree .°
'They shall return and dwellt in my shadow,
And they shall live well-watered liken a garden.
And they shall sprout like the vine;
Their renown shall be like that of the wine of Lebanon.
'Ephraim—what more has hey to do with idols!
It is I [Jehovah] who respond to him and look after him, I am like an ever green cypress;"'
From me is thy fruit found.
Whoever is wise, let him discern these things,
Prudent, let him perceive them; For Jehovah's ways are straight,
And the righteous walk in them, But the wicked stumble in them..
106
