JEREMIAH 


JEREMIAH'S CALL AND EARLY VISIONS (i.) 

The Call 
i. 

1 The messages of Jeremiah, the son of Hilkiah, a 
member of the priestly order resident in Anathothi in 
the district of Benjamin. 

2 A message came to him from Jehovah in the 
thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah, the son of Amon, 

3 king of Judah ; and (such messages) continued to 
come to him in the days of Jehoiakim, the son of 
Josiah, king of Judah, and up to the end of the 
eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of 
Judah, when in the fifth month the people of 
Jerusalem were swept into exile. 

4 This is the message that came to me from Jehovah : 

5 " My thoughts were upon thee before I created thee, 

And before thou wast bom I had set thee apart. 
And appointed thee unto the nations a prophet." 

6 And thus I made answer : 

" Alas ! O Lord Jehovah, Behold ! 

I have no skill of speech, I am only a child. "« 

7 Then Jehovah made answer to me : 

" Do not plead thou art still but a child, 
Thou must go wheresoever I send thee. 
And say whatsoever I bid thee. 

8 Be not afraid at the sight of them, 

For I will be with thee to save thee." 

9 Thus spoke Jehovah ; then with His outstretched hand 
He touched my mouth and said to me : 

" Herewith do I put My words in thy mouth, 

10 Behold this day do I give thee authority 
Over the nations and over the kingdoms, 

To uproot and demolish, destroy and tear down. 
To upbuild and to plant." 

The Reassuring Vision of the Almond Tree 

11 This further message came to me from Jehovah : 

" What seest thou there, Jeremiah ? " (said the Voice). 

12 " A branch of an almond tree," I answered. " Thou 
hast seen truly," said Jehovah, " f or I am watching? 
over My purpose, to perform it." 

The Vision of the Caldron of War 

13 Then there came to me a second message from 
Jehovah. " What seest thou now ? " (said the 
Voice). " A boiUng pot," I answered, " facing the 

14 north." Then Jehovah said to me : 
From the north shall disaster break forth 

Over all that inhabit the land.8 

15 For I, saith Jehovah, do summon 

The northern kingdoms all; 
Each king shall come and set his throne 

At the gates that lead into Jerusalem, 
And against her encircling walls, 

And against all the cities of Judah. 

14 



Jeremiah 



i6 I will utter My judgments against them 
Because of all their wickedness ; 
For Me they have forsaken, 
And to other gods offered sacrifice, 
And bowed to the work of their hands. 

The Divine Summons and the Divine Assurance 

17 As for thee, gird up thy loins, 

Arise and declare unto them 
Whatsoever I command thee. 
Let the sight of them not dismay thee, 
Else I will dismay thee before them. 

18 As for Me,i« behold I This day 

As a fortified city I make thee, 
A pniar of iron, a wall of bronze. 

Against the whole of the land — 
The kings and the courtiers of Judah, 

The priests and the folk of the land. 

19 They will fight thee, but thou shalt be victor : 

For I — saith Jehovah most solemnly — 
I will be with thee to save thee. 



THE EARLIER MESSAGES OF JEREMIAH 

(ii.-vi.)i 

Israel's Ancient Fidelity and Happiness 

ii. 

1 There came to me this message from Jehovah : 

2 Go and proclaim in the hearing of Jerusalem : 
Thus saith Jehovah : 

15 



Jeremiah 



I remember the love of thy youth — 

An affectionate bride wast thou — 
When thou foUowedst Me in the desert, 

A land that was all unsown ; 

3 Then Israel belonged to Jehovah, 

His first-fruits, sacred to Him. 
Whosoever devoured her was punished. 
On such did disaster fall. 

Israel's Long Record of Infidelity with its Bitter 
Consequences 

Her Ingratitude and Unparalleled Apostasy 

4 Hear the word of Jehovah, O household of Jacob, 

And all ye families of the household of Israel : 

5 Thus saith Jehovah : 

What wrong did your fathers discover in Me, 

That they went from Me afar. 
To follow after vanities, 

Till they, too, became a vanity, 

6 And never sought after Jehovah, 

Who brought them up out of Egypt, 

And led them through the desert, 

A land of steppes and pits, 
A land of drought and gloom, 

A land that no man traversed, 

A land where no man dwelt ? 

7 And I brought you into a garden-land. 

To enjoy its fruits and its good things ; 
But yecame and defiled My land 
And made Mine inheritance loathsome, 
i6 



Jeremiah 



8 No priest was heard any more 

Enquiring after Jehovah ; 
They that handle the law did not know Me, 

The rulers* rebelled against Me. 
The prophets spoke by Baal, 

And followed useless idols. 

9 I must therefore contend with you still, 

AncJ with your children's children. 

10 Pass across to the isles of Cyprus, 

Or send afar unto Kedar ;5 
Note carefully, and see. 

Hath there ever been aught like this ? 

11 Hath ever a nation exchanged its gods. 

Though they be no gods at all ? 
But My people hath exchanged 
Their Glory for useless idols. 

12 Be appalled at this, ye heavens, 

And shudder exceedingly. 

13 For My people, saith Jehovah, 

Have done two evil things : 
Me they have forsaken. 

The Fountain of Living Water, 
To hew for themselves leaking cisterns, 

That can hold no water at all. 

The Consequences of Israel's Apostasy 

14 Is7 Israel a servant ? 

Or is he a home-born slave ?8 
Why then hath he fallen a prey ? 

15 And why are his cities wasted ? 

17 



Jeremiah 



Young lions have roared against him. 

And lifted up their voice ; 
They have made his land all desolate, 
And no man dwelleth therein. 
i6 Yea, the people of Memphis and Daphnaeio 
Have shorn the crown of thy head ; 

17 And is this not come upon thee 

Through forsaking Jehovah thy God ?ii 

18 Now why dost thou wander to Egypt 

And drink the waters of Nile ?i2 
And why dost thou go to Assyria, 
To drink of the streams of Euphrates ? 

19 Thy defection shall bring thee pain, 

And thy wickedness sore reproof ; 
Thou shalt know and see for thyself 

What ai bitter thing it is 

To forsake Jehovah thy God, 
And to cherish no awe of Me, 

Saith the Lord Jehovah of Hosts. 



Israel's Devotion to Idolatry 

20 For of old thou didst break thy yoke. 

And burst thy bonds in sunder ; 
Thou saidst, " I refuse to serve : " 

But high upon every hill 
And under every green tree 

Thou didst stretch thee, playing the harlot. 

21 Yet I as a choice vine had planted thee — 

Sound was thy stock altogether ; 
18 



Jeremiah 



But now art thou turned to be bitter,i 
Thou wild degenerate vine ! 

22 For though thou shouldst wash thee with soda. 

And take thee abundance of soap, 

Yet the Lord, as He seeth thy guilt. 

Shall declare it of deepest dye. 

23 How canst thou say, " All stainless am I, 

I have not gone after the Baals " ? 
Look at thy way in the Valle3l« 

And know what thou hast done. 
A swift young camel art thou. 

That courseth hither and thither, 

24 A heifer run wild in the desert, 

Aglow with the heat of her passion ; 
That sniff eth the wind in her longing. 

And who can turn her back ? 
Mo one need wearily seek her — 

In her month she is sure to be found. 

25 Run not the shoes off thy feet. 

And spare thy throat, lest it parch. 
But thou snidst, " There is no hope — none : 
For I am in love with strangers. 
And after them will I go." 



The Impotence of the Gods solicited by Israel 

26 But Israel's house shall be shamed 

As a thief that is caught is ashamed — 
They and their kings and their princes, 
Their priests and their prophets together ; 

19 



Jeremiah 



27 That say to a stock, " My father," 

To a stone, " It is thou that hast borne me." 
For unto Me they turned 

Their backs and not their faces ; 
Yet in time of trouble they say, 

" O rise Thou up and save us." 

28 But where are the gods thou didst make thee ? 

Let them arise, if they 
Can save thee in time of trouble ; 
For as many as are thy cities. 
So many thy gods, Judah. 

29 Why do ye wrangle with Me ? 

For wicked ye are, every man of you ;i7 
Rebels are ye, saith Jehovah — 
Rebels against Me, each man of you. 

30 In vain have I smitten your children. 

They would not receive correction ; 

The swordis hath devoured your prophets, 

Like a lion that dealeth destruction, 

31 And yet ye are unafraid. 

So hear ye the word of Jehovah :i9 
Have I been a desert to Israel, 

A dark and gloomy land ? 
Why then do ye say, " We are free. 

We will come unto Thee nevermore ? " 

32 Can a maid forget her ornaments. 

Or a bride forget her sash ? 
Yet Me hath My people forgotten 
Days and days without number. 
20 



Jeremiah 



33 In quest of love how bravely 

Thou trippest along thy way ! 
Small wonder thy deeds are so vile, 
And thy way hath been all polluted. 20 

34 Yea, blood was found in thy skirts — 

Of the lives of the innocent poor — 
As though thou hadst caught them at theft ! 21 
For all this (I will therefore contend with thee) ; 22 

35 Yet thou hast said : " I am innocent, 

Surely His anger is over." 
But see, I will enter with thee into judgment. 
Because thou dost claim to be sinless. 

36 Why runnest thou hither and thither 

With so frivolous a heart ?23 
Thou shalt yet reap shame from Egypt, 
As thou hast reaped shame from Assyria. 

37 Yea, thence shalt thou also go forth. 

With thy hands upon thy head ;24 
For those whom thou trustest Jehovah hath spurned, 
And thou shalt not make good thine escape. 25 



Judah the Faithless 
iii. 

I If a man divorceth his wife, 

And she goeth away from him 
And becometh the wife of another. 

Can she ever again be his ?i 
Is such a woman2 as she 
Not altogether polluted ? 
21 



Jeremiah 



But thou hast played the harlot 

With many and many a lover ; 
And canst thou dare to dream 

Of returning to Me, saith Jehovah ? 

Lift up thine eyes to the heights, and behold, 

Where hast thou not been ravished ? 
Thou hast waited for them by the ways 

Like a Bedouin in the desert ; 
Thou hast stained the land by thy whoredoms, 

And by thy wicked ways, 
And through thy many lovers 

Thou hast let thyself be snared. = 

Thou hast a harlot's forehead. 

Refusing to be abashed. 
Yet but now hast been calling Me Father 

And Comrade of thy youth. 
" Can He keep His anger for ever. 

Or cherish it to the end ? " 
Yes, such were thy words ; but thy deeds 

To the last degree were vile. 



Judah's Infidelity more Awful than Israel's 

In* the days of King Josiah Jehovah said to me : 
" Hast thou seen what back-sliding Israel did ? She 
went up on every high mountain and under every 
green tree and there she played the harlot. I had 
hoped that, after all this, she would return to Me. But 
no ! she did not return. Her faithless sister Judah 

22 



Jeremiah 



8 saw that I had put back-sliding Israel away because of 
her adultery, and that I had given her a bill of divorce ; 
nevertheless faithless Judah was not at all afraid, but 

9 she too went and played the harlot, defiling the land 
by her wanton whoredom, and committing adultery 

10. with stones and stocks. Nevertheless, when faithless 
Judah turned to Me, it was not with her whole heart, 
but only in pretence. " 

Offer of Pardon and Promise of Glory 

11 Then Jehovah said to me, " Backshding Israel has 

12 justified herself more than faithless Judah. Go and 
proclaim these words towards the north and say : 

O backsliding Israel, turn, 

I will not look in anger upon thee ; 
For I am kind, saith Jehovah, 

I keep not Mine anger for ever. 

13 But only acknowledge thy guilt — 

That, disloyal to Jehovah thy God, 
Thou hast lavished thy love upon strangers 

Beneath every spreading tree. 
And unto My voice, saith Jehovah, 

Thou hast not inclined thine ear. 

14 Return, ye backsliding children, saith Jehovah, 
for I am your husband and lord ; and I will take 
one of you from each city and two from each clan, 

15 and I will bring you to Zion, and give you rulers after 
My own mind, who shall tend you with wisdom and 

16 skill. And when in those days you have grown 
numerous and fruitful in the land, saith Jehovah, men 
shall speak no more of the ark® of the covenant of 

23 



Jeremiah 



Jehovah ; it shall never enter their minds, they will 
neither think of it nor miss it, nor will they ever again 
make another, 

17 At that time Jerusalem shall be called the Throne 
of Jehovah, and all the nations shall gather thereto ;io 
they shall follow no more the stubbornness of their 

18 evil hearts. In those days the household of Judah 
shall join the household of Israel, and together they 
shall come from the north land to the land that I gave 
your forefathers for an inheritance. 



A Penitent Return will be met by the Divine 
Acceptance 

19 How glad, methought, shall I be 

To give thee a place among sons, 
To give thee a pleasant land. 

An inheritance passing fair ! 
Methought ye would caU Me Father, 

And follow Me evermore ; 

20 But ye have been false unto Me, 

As a woman is false to her lover. 

21 Hark ! weeping is heard on the heights 11 — 

It is suppliant Israel crying. 
Because they have walked perversely. 
Forgetting Jehovah their God. 

22 " Return, ye backsliding children, 

Your backsliding I will heal." 
" Behold, we are come unto Thee, 
For Thou art Jehovah our God. 
24 



J 



eremiaj 



23 The hills 12 are but a delusion, 

And the orgiesi upon the mountains ; 
In Jehovah our God alone 
Is Israel's salvation. 

24 The Baal 14 hath devoured the toil 

Of our fathers from our youth — 
Their sheep and their oxen together, 
Their sons and their daughters together 

25 We would lay us down in our shame. 

All covered with confusion ; 
For before our God we have sinned, 

We and our fathers from youth 

Even unto this very day ; 
And we have not hearkened at all 

To the voice of Jehovah our God." 



IV. 

1 " O Israel, if thou wilt return," saith Jehovah, 

If thou but return unto Me, 
And put out of My sight those things that I loathe ; 
If thou roam not hither and thither ; 

2 If sincerely and justly and truly 

Thou swear, ' As Jehovah Uveth,' 
Then nations shall pray for a blessing like thine,i 
And in thee shall they make their boast. 

3 For thus saith Jehovah to the citizens of Judah, 

And to them that dwell in Jerusalem : 
Break up the ground that lies fallow, 
And sow ye not among thorns ; 
25 



Jeremiah 



Circumcise ye your own selves to Jehovah, 

Remove from your hearts the foreskin, 
Ye citizens of Judah 

And ye that dwell in Jerusalem ; 
Lest My fury go forth like fire 

And blaze beyond all quenching, 

Because of your evil doings. " 



The Impending Judgment to be Executed by a 
Foreign Invader 

5 Declare ye this message in Judah, 

And publish it in Jerusalem ; 
Blow the trumpet throughout the land. 
Cry aloud and say, 
" Gather and let us betake ourselves 
Into the fortified cities." 

6 Lift towards Zion a signal, 

Fiee ye for safety and stay not ; 
For disaster and fell destruction 
I soon will bring out of the north. 

7 A lion hath gone from his thicket ; 

The Devastator of nations 
Hath left and gone forth from his place 
To desolate the earth.  
3 Gird yourselves therefore with sackcloth, 
Make ye lament and wail ; 
For the fierce glowing wrath of Jehovah 
Doth turn not away nor leave us. 
26 



Jeremiah 



9 The heart of the king and the princes 
Shall fail in that day, saith Jehovah ; 
The priests shall be seized with horror, 
And the prophets with amazement. 

10 They shall say " Ah, Lord Jehovah ! 
Ah ! Surely Thou hast deluded 

This people and Jerusalem, 
Assuring us all would be well, 

WTiile the sword doth pierce to the soul." 

11 This message shall then be declared 

To Jerusalem and this people : 
A glowing wind from the desert 

Cometh straight upon My people. 
But not to winnow or cleanse — 

12 Too keen is the blast for that. 

So now I will utter My judgment upon them. 

13 Behold ! he mounteth as clouds, 

His chariots are like to the whirlwind. 
His horses are swifter than eagles : 
" Woe unto us ! we are spoiled." 

14 Wash thy heart of wickedness, 

Jerusalem, that thou mayest be saved : 
How long wilt thou harbour within thee 
Thine evil imaginations ? 

15 Hark ! a message from Dan, 

From Mount Ephraim, evil tidings ; 

16 Proclaim it among the nations. 

And publish it over Jerusalem. 

27 



Jeremiah 



Behold ! leopards are coming 
From a land that is far away, 

They are raising loud their roar 
Against the cities of Judah. 

17 Lying in wait in the fields, 

They beset her round and round — 
"Because," declareth Jehovah, 
"She hath rebelled against Me." 

18 Thy doings and thy behaviour 

Have brought these things upon thee ; 
This is the fruit of thy wickedness — 
Bitter indeed it is, 
It pierceth thy very heart. 



The Prophet's Anguish 

19 the pain, the pain in my bosom, 

The walls of my heart are athrob : 
My heart is a tumult within me, 

I cannot hold my peace ; 
For the sound of the trumpet I hear, 

The din and alarum of battle. 

20 Ruin doth break upon ruin. 

For all the land is laid waste ; 
My tents of a sudden are spoiled, 
Yea, all in a moment my curtains.  

21 How long must I look on the standard 

And hear the sound of the trumpet ? 

22 For foolish is my people. 

And me they do not know ; 
28 



Jeremiah 



Sottish children they are, 

Devoid of understanding : 
Wise are they to do evil, * 

But they know not how to do good. 

23 I looked at the earth, and behold ! it was empty, 

I looked at the heavens, and their light was gone, 

24 I looked at the mountains, and lo ! they were trembling. 

And all the hills moved to and fro. 

25 I looked and looked, but behold, there was no man. 

And all the birds of the heaven had fled. 

26 I looked at the fruit-land : behold ! it was desert. 

And all the cities were fallen in ruins, 

Laid waste by the fierce hot wrath of Jehovah. 



The Irrevocable Doom 

27 For thus Jehovah hath said, 

The land shall be all desolation. 

28 For this the earth shall mourn. 

And the heavens above be black ; 
For I have not repented My words, 
And T will not turn back from My purpose. 

29 At the noise of the horsemen and bowmen 

The whole land taketh to flight ; 
They enter the thickets and caves, 10 

They climb up on to the rocks. 
Abandoned is every city, 

And not a man dwelleth therein. 
29 



Jeremiah 



30 Why, then, dost thou robe thee in scarlet, 

And deck thee with jewels of gold, 
And paintest thine eyes to enlarge them ? 

In vain dost thou make thyself fair. 
They that doted on thee despise thee ; 

It is thy life that they seek. 

31 For a cry have I heard as of woman in travail, 

A scream as of one bringing forth her first child. 
Hark ! 'tis the daughter of Zion 

That gaspeth and spreadeth her hands. 
Saying, " Ah ! woe is me ! I am faint, 

I am sinking — the victim of murderers." 

The Universal Corruption of the Nation 

V. 

1 Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, 

Look ye around and examine ; 
Search in her open spaces 

If ye can find a man — 
Any that acteth justly. 

And seeketh after truth ; 
Then I — Jehovah declarethi — 

Will grant her My forgiveness. 

2 But even when they say, " By Jehovah," 

They are ready to swear to a lie. 

3 Dost Thou look then, Jehovah, on falsehood,  

And not upon the truth ? 
To all Thy blows they were callous. 

They refused to accept correction ; 
Their faces were harder than stone. 

They refused to turn (and repent). 

30 



Jeremiah 



' But these," thought I, " are the poor, 

The people without understanding, 
Who know not the way of Jehovah, 

The ordinance of their God. 
I will get me unto the great men, 

And unto them will I speak ; 
For they know the way of Jehovah, 

The ordinance of their God." 

But these very men have all broken the yoke, 

And snapped the bonds asunder. 
Soon therefore shall they be slain 

By a lion out of the forest ; 

A wolf from the steppes shall despoil them. 
A leopard shall lurk by their cities. 

And rend all that issue therefrom. 
For many are their transgressions. 

And far they have turned away. 

How then for this can I pardon thee ? 

Thy children have forsaken Me, 
Swearing by gods that are no gods ; 

And, when to the full I had fed them. 
Adultery they committed. 

They lodged- in the houses of harlots. 

Well fed stallions were they, 

Neighing each for his neighbour's wife. 
And* crimes Uke these, saith Jehovah, 

Am I to leave unpunished ? 
Shall not My soul be avenged 

On a nation such as this ? 

31 



Jeremiah 



The Implacable Doom 

10 Get ye up to her vines and destroy them, 

Make an utter end of them; 
Take away her branches, 
For they are not Jehovah's. 

11 For utterly faithless to Me 

Are the households of Israel and Judah ; 

12 They have denied Jehovah, 

And said, " He will never do it ; 
No evil shall come upon us, 

We shall see neither sword nor famine. 

13 The prophets are only wind. 

The word is not in them : 
So be it done unto them." 

14 Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God of Hosts 

Because they have uttered this word, 
Behold, My word in thy7 mouth 

I will make like a flaming fire, 
And this people shall be as the fuel. 

And it shall clean devour them. 

15 Behold, I am bringing against you, 

O household of Israel, saith Jehovah, 

A nation from afar, 
An imperishable nation, 

A very ancient nation, 
A nation whose language thou knowest not, 

Whose speech is strange unto thee. 

16 Like an open grave is their quiver, 

And giants are they all : 
32 



Jeremiah 



17 They shall eat up thy bread and thy harvest, 

They shall eat up thy sons and thy daughters, 
They shall eat up thy flocks and thy herds, 
• They shall eat up thy vines and thy fig-trees, 
They shall beat down the fortified cities, 

Wherein thou didst trust, with the sword. 

18 But in those days, saith Jehovah, 

I will not make a clean end of you. 10 

19 And in time to come, when ye say to Me, 

" Why hath Jehovah our God 
Done all these things unto us ? " 

Then shalt thou say unto them, 
" ksye have forsaken Me, 

And served alien gods in your land. 
So ye shall be servants to strangers 
In a land that is not your own." 



The Utter Depravity of the People and their 
Religious Leaders 

20 Declare ye this in the household of Jacob, 

And publish this message in Judah ; 

21 Hear this, ye foolish and senseless people. 

With eyes that see not, and ears that hear not. 

22 Fear ye not Me ? saith Jehovah, 

Tremble ye not at My presence. 
Who hath set the sand as a bound for the sea, 

As a barrier eternal which cannot be passed ? 
Its waters may toss, but they cannot prevail ; 

Its waves may roar, yet they cannot pass over it. 

33 



Jeremiah 



23 But these people are stubborn, defiant in heart, 

They are turned aside and gone. 

24 For they do not say in their hearts, 

" Let us fear Jehovah, our God, 
Who giveth the rain in its season, 

The early and latter rain. 
And unto us reserveth 

The weeks appointed for harvest." 

25 This order your sins have disturbed. 

Your crimes have withheld from you blessing. 

26 For among My people are knaves. 

Who set snares and with trapsi catch men. 

27 Like a cage full of birds, so their houses 

Are full of (the gains of) deceit ; 
And so they grow great and rich, 

28 They are waxen fat, they are sleek : 
They run riot in deeds of wickedness. 

They defend not the rights of the orphan. 
Nor champion the cause of the needy. 

29 Andi2 things Uke these, saith Jehovah, 

Am I to leave unpunished ? 
Shall not My soul be avenged 
On a nation such as this ? 

30 An appalling, a horrible thing 

Is come to pass in the land. 

31 The prophets prophesy falsely, 

And from them do the priests take their teaching,  
And My people love it so ; 

But what will ye do in the end ? 

34 



Jeremiah 

The Approach of the Invader 



VI. 



1 Flee ye for safety, ye Benjamites, 

Forth from the midst of Jerusalem ; 
Blow ye the trump in Tekoa.i 

Raise a beacon on Beth-haccherem r 
For out of the north  there peereth 

Disaster and fell destruction. 

2 As a fair and luxurious mead 

Is the height of the daughter of Zion ; 

3 But shepherds* shall come to assail her, 

They and their flocks together ; 
They shall pitch their tents round about her, 
And graze on her, each where he camps. 

4 " Prepare' ye war against her ; 

Up ! let us storm her at noon-day." 
" Alas ! for the day declineth, 

The shadows of evening are lengthening." 

5 " Then up ! let us storm her by night, 

And her palaces let us destroy." 

6 For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 
Hew ye down her trees, 

And cast up a mound against her. 
Woe to thee, City of Falsehood, « 
Within thee is nothing but tyranny. 

7 As a well keepeth fresh her waters. 

She keepeth her wickedness fresh ; 
Within her are rapine and violence heard, 
Sickness and wounds are for ever before Me. 

8 O Jerusalem, be admonished. 

Lest My soul from thee be severed, 

35 



Jeremiah 



Lest I make thee a desolation, 
An uninhabited land. 

9 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts ; 
*' Glean7 like a vine full thoroughly 

Those that are left of Israel ; 
Set thy hand once more 

As a vintager unto the branches, "s 

10 " But9 to whom shall I speak and bear witness 

In such wise that they listen ? 
For see ! their ear is uncircumcised. 

Helpless are they to hearken. 
To them is the word of Jehovah 

Become an utter scorn ; 

They have no pleasure in it. 

11 I am filled with the wrath of Jehovah, 

I am weary of holding it back : 
On the child in the street Ii*> will pour it, 

On youths, too, where'er they assemble ; 
It shall smite men and women aUke, 

And the aged, whose days are many. 

12 Their 11 homes shall be turned unto others. 

Their fields and their wives together ; 
For against those that dwell in the land 
I will stretch out My hand, saith Jehovah." 

The National Materialism and its Doom 

13 For great and small aUke, * 

They are all of them greedy of gain ; 
Prophet and priest alike — 
Every man of them practiseth falsehood. 

36 



Jeremiah 



14 They would heal the hurt of My people, 

As though it were but slight ; 
" It is well, it is well," they say, 
" When it is anything but well." 

15 Are they at all abashed 

At their deeds abominable ? 
Nay, they are unabashed. 

They know not how to blush. 
They shall therefore fall with the fallen ; 

In the hour of their visitation 

They shall stumble, saith Jehovah. 

16 Thus did Jehovah say : 
Stand in the ways and see. 

And ask for the ancient paths ; 
Marki2 that which leadeth to happiness, 

See that ye walk therein — 
And ye shall find rest to your souls. 

But they said, " We refuse to walk in it." 

17 And over you I set watchmen, i 

Saying " Hark for the sound of the trumpet." 
But they said, " We refuse to hearken." 

18 Wherefore hearken, ye nations, and hear, O earth. 

Take knowledge of that which is coming, i* 

19 Behold, I will bring on this people 

Disaster, the fruits of their backsliding ;i5 
For they heeded not My words, 
My instruction they rejected. 

20 Of what avail to Me 

Is the incense that cometh from Sheba,! 
And sweet cane from a distant land ? 

37 



Jeremiah 

I accept not your burnt-offerings, 
Your sacrifice pleaseth Me not. 

21 Therefore, thus saith Jehovah : Behold, 

I will set on the way of this people 
Stones over which they may stumble. 

And over them stumble they shall, 
Fathers and sons together — 

And neighbour and friend shall perish. 

22 Thus saith Jehovah, Behold ! 

A people doth come from the north7 land, 
A mighty nation is stirring 
At the uttermost ends of the earth . 

23 Bow they wield and javeUn — 

Cruel and pitiless they. 
With a voice Hke the roar of the sea. 
And they ride upon horses and chariots, is 
Arrayed, Uke one man, for the battle, 
Against thee, O daughter of Zion. 

24 The rumour thereof we have heard. 

And all unnerved are we : 
Anguish hath seized upon us, 

And pangs as of women in travail. 

25 Venture not forth to the open, 

Go not abro ad on the highway ; 
For there is the sword of the enemy — 
Terror on every side. 

26 O daughter of My people. 
Gird thee about with sackcloth 

And sprinkle9 thee with ashes ; 

38 



Jeremiah 



Make mourning and bitter lament, 

As for an only son ; 
For suddenly shall come 

The Devastator upon us. 

Jeremiah as Assayer of the National Character 

27 I have set thee to test My people, 

To discover and test their way. 

28 Refractory are they all, 

They slander as they go ; 
They are all of them brass and iron. 
They are all of them corrupt. 

29 Fiercely the bellows blow, 

The lead is consumed by the fire ; 
But in vain doth the smelter keep smelting. 
The dross is not smelted away. 

30 Their name shall be refuse silver. 

For them hath Jehovah as refuse rejected. 20 

MESSAGES FROM THE MIDDLE PERIOD 
OF JEREMIAH'S CAREER 
(vii.-ix., X. 17-25)1 

Salvation lies neither in Temple nor Ritual, but only 

in Repentance and Reform 
vii. 

1 The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah : 

2 Take thy stand at the gate of the Temple, and there 
make the following proclamation. 2 Say, Listen to 
this message from Jehovah, all ye men of Judah that 

39 



Jeremiah 



3 enter these gates to worship Jehovah. Thus saith 
Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways 
and your doings, and I will guarantee this place as your 

4 permanent home. But put no trust in lying messen- 
gers, who say : " This is the Temple of Jehovah, the 

5 Temple of Jehovah, the Temple of Jehovah." For if 
you really amend your ways and your doings : if 
you really do justice as between man and man ; 

6 if you abstain from the oppression of the resident 
alien, the fatherless and the widow, from the shed- 
ding of innocent blood in this place, and from devotion 

7 to other gods to your own hurt, then I will guarantee 
you a home here for all time in the land that I gave 
your forefathers. 

8 But see, you are putting your trust in doctrines that 

9 are as profitless as they are false. What ! you com- 
mit theft, murder, adultery, perjury, you burn sacri- 
fice to the Baal, you run after other gods that are 

10 strange to you ; and then you (have the hardihood 
to) come and stand before me in this House which is 
called by My name, and say, " Now we are safe " — in 
order, forsooth, to carry on all these abominations. 

11 This House which bears My name you regard, do you, 
as nothing but a robbers' cave ? Make no mistake : 
I — saith Jehovah — I have not been bUnd to all this. 

12 I would ask you to visit My sanctuary in Shiloh, 
where I put My name at the first, and see what the 
wickedness of My people Israel constrained Me to do 

13 to it. And so it will be now, saith Jehovah. Because 
you have perpetrated all these enormities, in defiance 
of My most earnest and repeated words, and have 

14 refused to respond to My call, therefore this Temple 

40 



Jeremiah 



in which you repose your trust — called by My name 
though it be — and the place that I gave to you and 
your forefathers, I will consign to the same fate as 

15 overtook Shiloh ; and I will hurl you out of My sight 
as I have hurled your brethren, the whole race of 
Ephraim.4 

16 As for thyself, offer no prayer for this people, raise 
no cry or prayer on their behalf, and make no inter- 

17 cession to Me, for 1 will not listen to thee. Seest thou 
not what they are doing in the cities of Judah and in 

18 the streets of Jerusalem ? The children gather wood, 
the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead dough, 
to make cakes to the Queen of Heaven,  and to pour 
out drink-offerings to other gods, in order to vex Me. 

19 Is it I, then, saith Jehovah, whom they are vexing ? 
is it not rather themselves, doomed as they are to 

20 bring confusion upon their own faces ? Therefore, 
thus saith the Lord Jehovah, " My anger and My 
fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man 
and beast, upon trees of the field and fruit of the ground, 
and it shall blaze in unquenchable flame." 

21 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel, 
Put the flesh of your burnt-offerings and of your 
(other) sacrifices together, and make a common meal 

22 of them both aUke ; for on the day that I brought your 
forefathers out of the land of Egypt, I gave them no 
commandment nor did I utter a syllable with regard to 

23 burnt offering or sacrifice. But the commandment I 
gave them was this : Listen, I said, to My voice, and 
then I will be your God and you shall be My people, 
and take My commandments as the standard of all 

24 your Ufe — this is the way to prosperity. But, instead 

41 



Jeremiah 



of inclining their ear and listening, they followed the 
dictates of their own stubborn and wicked hearts ; they 

25 went backwards instead of forwards. Ever since your 
forefathers came out of the land of Egypt, every day up 
to this very day I have been sending you early and late 

26 all My servants the prophets. Instead, however, 
of inclining their ear, they stiffened their necks and 
behaved worse than their forefathers. 

27 This, then, is the message thou art to address to 
them, though they will not hsten to thee, nor respond 

28 to thy call — thy message is to be this : 
This is the folk that refused to Usten 

To the voice of Jehovah their God — 
That refused to accept correction. 
Sincerity is vanished. 

It is found on their lips no more. 

The Fearful Judgment upon Idolatry 

29 Shear off thys locks — away with them — 

Lift up a dirge on the heights : 
For Jehovah hath spurned and forsaken 
The race that hath roused Him to anger. 

30 The people of Judah, saith Jehovah, have done the 
thing I abhor : the very Housei that bears My name 
they have defiled by introducing into it their abomin- 

31 able worship. They have built a sanctuary n of Topheth 
in the Valley of the son of Hinnom, for the burning of 
their sons and daughters in the fire, though this was 
no commandment of Mine — such a thing never entered 
into My mind. 

32 Mark this therefore : days are coming, saith Jehovah, 

42 



Jeremiah 



when it shall be no more called Topheth, nor the Valley 
of the son of Hinnom, but the Valley of vSlaughter, and 
Topheth shall be used as a burial-place for want of 

33 room (elsewhere). 12 The dead bodies of this people 
shall be devoured by the birds of the air and the beasts 

34 of the earth, and none shall scare them away. In the 
cities of Judah and on the streets of Jerusalem I will 
still the voice of mirth and gladness, and the voice of 
bridegroom and bride ; for the land shall become a 

viii. waste. 

1 At that time, saith Jehovah, they shall bring out of 
their graves the bones of the kings, the princes, the 
priests, and the prophets, of Judah, and of the in- 

2 habitants of Jerusalem, and they shall spread them 
before the sun and the moon and all the host of heaven, 
whom they loved and served and followed and sought 
and worshipped ; and they shall remain ungathered 
and unburied, they shall be for dung on the face of the 

3 ground. And in all places to which I have driven them, 
every man that is left of this evil family would choose ' 
rather death than Ufe, saith Jehovah of Hosts. 

The National Refusal to Repent and the Coming 
Retribution 

4 Thoti shalt say to them. Thus saith Jehovah : 
Doth not one who has fallen rise up again. 

And one who hath wandered turn back again ? 

5 Why, then, doth thy people keep turning 

For ever and ever backward. 
Clinging to ways deceitful. 
Refusing to return ? 

43 



Jeremiah 



6 I have listened with ear intent — 

And their words are utterly false. 

Not a man repents of his wickedness 
Or thinks upon what he has done : 
But each rushes on in his course 
As a war-horse rushes in battle. 

7 The very stork in the heavens 

Doth know her appointed seasons ;i 
The turtle, the swift, and the swallow. 

Observe the time of their coming : 
But the ordinance of Jehovah 

My people doth not know. 

8 How can ye say, " We are wise. 

And with us is the law of Jehovah " ? 
For see ! the false pen of the scribes 
Hath turned it into a falsehood.  

9 So the wise shall be put to shame, 

Be dismayed and taken captive. 
They have spurned the word of Jehovah — 
What manner of wisdom have they ? 

10 So their wives I will give unto others. 

To conquerors their fields. 

For, great and small aUke, 

They are all of them greedy of gain ; 
Prophet and priest aUke — 

Every man of them practiseth falsehood. 

11 They would heal the hurt of My people 

As though it were but slight ; 
" It is well, it is well," they say, 
" When it is anything but well." 

44 



Jeremiah 



12 Are they at all abashed 

At their deeds abominable ? 
Nay, they are unabashed, 

They know not how to blush. 
They shall therefore fall with the fallen ; 

In the hour of their visitation 

They shall stumble, saith Jehovah. 

13 When I, saith Jehovah, would gather their fruit, 

There is not a grape on the vine ; 
There is not a fig on the fig-tree, 
All withered are the leaves.* 

14 " Why5 are we sitting still ? 

Assemble yourselves together. 
Let us enter the fortified cities, 

And there let us meet our doom ; 
For Jehovah our God hath doomed us. 

Hath given us gall to drink, 

Because we have sinned against Him. 

15 We wait for peace, but no good cometh ; 

For a season of heaUng, but lo ! dismay." 

16 From Dan is heard the snort of his steeds. 
At the sound of his stallions neighing 

All the land doth tremble. 
They come and devour the land 
And all that is therein. 
The city and her inhabitants. 

17 For see ! I will send amongst you 

Serpents of basiUsk order. 
Which cannot be charmed at all ; 
And they, saith Jehovah, shall bite you. 

45 



Jeremiah 



Jeremiah's Lament over the Sin and the Doom 
of his People 

i8 Past healing is my sorrow. 

My heart is heavy within me. 

19 Hark ! a voice is calling 

From the daughter of my people 

From a land that is far away ;7 
" Is not Jehovah in Zion ? 

Is not her King therein ? " 
**. With their images why have they vexed Me — 

With futile foreign gods ? " 

20 " The harvest is past, the summer is ended. 

And all unsaved are we." 

21 For the daughter of my people, 

All broken, mine own heart is broken ; 
I go about in mourning, 
With the clutch of horror upon me. 

22 Is there no balm in Gilead ? 

Is there no physician there ? 
Why cometh then no healing 
To the daughter of my people ? 



IX. 



O that my head were waters, 

And mine eyes a fountain of tears. 
That day and night I might weep 

For the slain of the daughter of my people ! 
O that I had in the desert 

A spot such as travellers lodge in ; 
For then would I leave my people, 

Yea, from them I would go ; 

46 



Jeremiah 



For they be all adulterers, 

A company of traitors, 

That bend their tongue like a bow. 
It is not the true, but the false, 

That has mastery in the land ; 
For they pass from evil to evil. 

And they know not Me, saith Jehovah. 

Let each man beware of his neighbour, 

And trust not any brother : 
For brothers are tricksters, all of them, 

And neighbours are slanderers all. 
They all deceive one another. 

The truth they will not speak ; 
They have taught their tongue to lie, 

They behave like knaves and fools. 2 

Oppression upon oppression, 

Deceit upon deceit : 

They refuse, saith Jehovah, to know Me. 
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

Behold I will smelt them and test them, 
For alas ! I must turn Mine eyes away 

From the daughter of My people. 
Their tongue is a deadly arrow, 

The words of their mouth are deceit ; 
They speak their neighbour fair, 

But at heart they are laying a trap for him. 

And* crimes like these, saith Jehovah, 

Am I to leave unpunished ? 
Shall not My soul be avenged 

On a nation such as this ? 

47 



Jeremiah 



10 Lift a lament for the mountains, 

A dirge for the wilderness pastures ; 
For wasted they lie and untraversed, 

No lowing of cattle they hear : 
The birds of the air and the beasts 

Are fled away and gone. 

11 I will make of Jerusalem ruins, 

A place for jackals to haunt ; 
I will make of the cities of Judah 
An uninhabited waste. 

12 Where is the man that is wise 

And will lay this thing to heart ? 
Where is the man that Jehovah 

Himself hath communed with and charged 
To declare why the land is a ruin. 

Laid waste Uke the untravelled wilderness ? 

13 And Jehovah said unto me : 
Because they forsook My law 

Which I had set before them, 
And did not live thereby. 
But disobeyed My voice, 

14 And followed their stubborn hearts. 

And the Baals that their fathers had taught them 

15 Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

The God of Israel ; Behold, 
I will feed this people with wormwood. 
And give them gall to drink. 

16 I will scatter them far among nations 

To them and their fathers unknown ; 
The sword I will send to pursue them, 
Until I have clean consumed them. 
48 



Jeremiah 



17 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 
Now mark ye well and summon 

The women that chant in dirges ; 
And send for the skilful women, 
That they may come in haste, 

18 And lift up for us a lament ; 
That our eyes may run with tears, 

And our eyelids gush with water. 

19 Hark ! from Zion float sounds of waiUng, 

" Alas ! how are we spoiled ; 
We are put to utter shame, 
Because we have left the land,7 . 
And our homes are hurled to the ground." 

20 Hear then, ye women, the word of Jehovah, 

Receive with your ears the word of His mouth. 
And teach this lament to your daughters, 
Each one to her neighbour this dirge : 

21 " Death hath climbed up to our windows. 

And into our palaces entered, 
Sweeping the child from the streets 

And the youth from the broad open spaces. 

22 The corpses of men are fallen 

Like dung on the face of the field ; 
Or like sheaves behind the reaper. 
With none to gather them up." 



The True Glory of a Man 

23 Thus saith Jehovah : 

Let the wise man not boast of his wisdom, 
Let the strong man not boast of his strength ; 

49 



Jeremiah 



Let the rich man not boast of his riches, 
24 But in this be the boaster's boast — 
In insight and knowledge of Me 

As Jehovah, who over the earth 
Doeth kindness and justice and right 

For these are the things that I love. 



The Necessity for Circumcision of Heart 

25 Mark this weU, saith Jehovah : days are coming 
when I will punish all those that, though circumcised 

26 (in flesh) are uncircumcised (in heart)  — Egypt, Judah, 
Edom, Ammon, Moab, and all those denizens of the 
wilderness that have the corners of their hair cUpped ; 
for while all the nations are uncircumcised, 9 the whole 
household of Israel is uncircumcised in heart. 



The Approaching Doom of Exile 

X. 

17 Take up thy pack from the ground,i 

(O Jerusalem), that sittest beleaguered. 

18 For thus saith Jehovah, Behold, 
This time I will surely shng out 

The inhabitants of the land, 
And bring them into such straits 
That they shall melt for fear.2 

19 Ah ! woe is me ! I am broken. 

And smitten very sore, 
" Yes, this is a stroke indeed," 
Said I, " and I must bear it. 
50 



Jeremiah 



20 My tent is despoiled and perished, 

And all my cords are broken ; 
My flock is vanished clean. 
There is none to stretch my tent, 
Or to hang up my curtains more. 

21 For the shepherds are foolish grown, 

And nothing they care for Jehovah ; 
For this cause they have not prospered, 
And all their flock is scattered. 

22 Hark ! a rumour ! behold, it cometh, 

A mighty uproar from the land of the north,  
It shall make of the cities of Judah a waste, 
A place to be haunted of jackals. 



Prayer that Judgment may be Tempered with 
Mercy 

23 Well, O Jehovah, I know 

That a man's way lies not with himself ; 
It is not in the power of man 
To walk and direct his steps. 

24 When therefore Thou chastenest us. 

Do Thou deal, O Jehovah, in measure, 
And not in Thine indignation ; 
For so wouldst Thou bring us to nothing. 

25 Pour« out Thy wrath on the heathen. 

That have not cared for Thee — 
And on tribes that invoke not Thy name ; 
For Jacob they have devoured. 
They have desolated his dwelHng. 

51 



Jeremiah 



The Folly of Fearing the Impotent and Unreal 
Gods of the Heathen 

X. 

1 Listen, O household of Israel, to the word which Jehovah 

2 hath spoken to you. Thus saith Jehovah : 
Learn not the ways of the heathen, 

And be not dismayed at the signs in the sky. 
As the heathen are dismayed ; 

3 For heathen religion is vapour. 
A tree is cut down in the forest 

And fashioned by craftsman's axe, 
4« Adorned with silver and gold — 
9 With silver beat fine, brought from Tarshish, 
And gold that cometh from Ophir — 

And wrought by the craftsman and goldsmith, 
And robed in blue and in purple — 
The work of skilled men are they all — 
46 And fastened with nails and hammers, 
To keep them from toppling over. 

5 They are altogether dumb. 

Like a scarecrow in garden of cucumbers ; 
Carried they must needs be. 

For they cannot go of themselves. 
Be not afraid of them, then. 

For they have it not in their power 

To do either good or harm. 

6 There* is none Uke Thee, Jehovah ; 

Thou art great, and great is Thy name in might. 

7 Who should not fear Thee, O King of the nations ? 

For Thee it becometh well ; 
52 



Jeremiah 



For among the wise men of the nations all, 
And among their kingdoms aU, 
There is none that is like unto Thee. 
8 One and all, they are senseless and silly, 
Instructed of gods that are wooden. 

10 But Jehovah is God indeed, 

A living God, and a King everlasting ; 
The earth at His wrath doth tremble, 
His anger no nation can bear. 

12 He« created the earth by His power. 

He established the world by His wisdom, 
He stretched out the heavens by His skill. 

13 When He uttereth His voice, 7 

The waters roar in the heavens. 
And He causeth vapour to rise 

From the uttermost ends of the earth. 
Lightnings He made for the rain. 

And the wind He brings out of His storehouses. 

14 How fooUshs is man with his knowledge ! 

The goldsmith is shamed by his image ; 
His idols are a delusion. 
And breath in them is none. 

15 They are an empty mockery. 

In the hour of their trial they shall perish. 

16 Not such is the Portion of Jacob, 

His God9 is the Framer of all things : 
Jehovah of Hosts is His name. 



53 



Jeremiah 



Jeremiah Exhorts the People to be True to the 

Demands of the Deuteronomic Law 
xi. 

1 The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah. 

2 " Listen to the words of this covenant/ and declare 
them to the men of Judah and the inhabitants of 

3 Jerusalem. vSay to them, Thus saith Jehovah, the God 
of Israel : Accursed be the man that refuses to listen 

4 to the words of the covenant with which I charged your 
forefathers on the day that I brought them out of that 
iron furnace, 2 the land of Egypt. I promised them then 
that, if they obeyed My voice, and conformed to all 
My commandments, they should be My people and I 

5 would be their God, and thus the oath would be estab- 
hshed that I swore to their forefathers — to give them 
a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day." 
Then I answered and said, " Amen, Jehovah." 

6 Jehovah then said to me, " Make this proclamation 
throughout the cities of Judah and on the streets of 
Jerusalem : Listen to the words of this covenant and 

7 act upon them. For early and late, ever since the day 
that I brought your forefathers out of the land of 
Egypt up to this day, I have been earnestly adjuring 

8 them to Usten to My voice ; but instead of obediently 
incHning their ear, every man of them followed the 
dictates of his own wicked and stubborn heart ; so I 
brought upon them all the threats of this covenant 
which I had charged them to observe, but which they 
failed to observe." 

9 Further Jehovah said to me, " The people of Judah 
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem have been engaged in 

10 a manifest conspiracy (against Me). They have 

54 



Jeremiah 



reverted to the sins of their forefathers who refused to 
listen to My words, and they are actually indulging in 
the worship of other gods : the households of Israel 
and Judah alike have broken the covenant I made with 

11 their forefathers. Therefore thus saith Jehovah : 
Mark this — I wiU bring upon them a disaster which they 
shall be powerless to escape ; and when they cry to Me, I 

12 will turn a deaf ear. Then the cities of Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem shall go and cry to the gods to 
whom they bum sacrifice ; but no help shall they get 

13 from them in the day of their calamity : for your gods, 
O Judah, are as numerous as your cities ; and as 
numerous as the streets of Jerusalem are the altars you 
have set up for sacrifice in the scandalous worship 
of the Baal. 

14 As for thyself, offer no prayer for this people, raise 
no cry or prayer on their behalf ; for I will not listen 
when they call to Me in the day of their calamity. 

15 What business hath My Beloved' 

In My house, after conduct so vile ? 
Shall vows5 and the sacred flesh 
Avert from thee thy doom P 
Then mightest thou rejoice. 

16 A spreading, graceful olive 

Jehovah had called thy name ; 
But to the roar of a mighty storm 
He hath set it ablaze with lightning. 
And the branches thereof are marred. 

17 For Jehovah of Hosts that planted thee hath pro- 
nounced evil against thee in requital for the evil in which 
the households of Israel and Judah have vexatiously 
indulged, by burning sacrifice to the Baal." 

55 



Jeremiah 



A Plot against Jeremiah's Life 

The Plot 

i8 I knew — for Jehovah had told me, 

And revealed to me what they were doing : 

19 But I — like an innocent lamb 

That is led to the slaughter was I. 
Yea, all unconscious was I 

Of the plots they were plotting against me — 
To ruin the tree with its sap, 
From the land of the living to root me 

And banish my name out of mind. 

20 But Jehovah of Hosts, Thou righteous Judge, 

Who mind and heart dost prove, 
Let me see Thy vengeance upon them, 
For on Thee have I rolled my cause. 

21 Therefore, thus saith Jehovah concerning the men of 
Anathoth who seek thy Ufe and threaten thee with 
death at their hands, if thou preach in the name of 
Jehovah : 

22 Therefore saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

Behold I will visit them sternly ; 
Their young men shall die by the sword. 

Their sons and their daughters shall perish with 
hunger. 

23 Not one of them shall be left ; 

For over the men of Anathoth 
Calamity I will bring 

In the year of their visitation. 



56 



Jeremiah 



Jeremiah's Perplexity and Prayer for Vengeance 
xii. 

1 " Righteous art thou, O Jehovah, 

When I make my plaint unto Thee ; 
Yet the case I would reason with Thee. 
Why do the wicked prosper ? 
And why do the faithless all flourish ? 

2 Thou plantest them, yea, they take root ; 

They spread, yea, they bring forth fruit. 
Nigh on their lips art Thou, 

But far, far away from their hearts. 

3 But Thou, O Jehovah, dost know me. 

My heart towards Thee Thou hast proved. 
Pull them out, then, like sheep for the slaughter, 
To the day of slaughter devote them. 

4 How long must the land still mourn, 

And the herbs of the fields be all withered ? 
Beast and bird are vanished. 

Because of the sin of her people, 

Who think God is bUnd to their ways."i 

The Divine Answer 

5 " If thy race with the footmen hath wearied thee, 

How wilt thou vie with the horse ? 
If thou takest to flight in a land that is safe. 
Then how wilt thou do in the jungle of Jordan ?3 

6 For thy father's household, thine own very brethren, 

Even they have played thee false. 
They pursue thee with clamours loud : 
Trust them not, when they speak thee fair." 

57 



Jeremiah 



Lament over the Havoc wrought upon Judah by 
her Neighbours 

The Havoc 

7 My housed I have forsaken, 

My heritage I have cast off ; 
Into the hands of her foes 

I have given the Beloved of My soul. 

8 My darling' is grown to Me (fierce) 

As a lion in the jungle ; 
She hath lifted her voice against Me, 
And therefore I abhor her. 

9 Is My darling a speckled bird, 

That the birds circle round and assail her V 
Come, all ye beasts of the field, 
Come hither to devour. 

10 Shepherds many have ruined My vineyard, 

And trampled My ground under foot ; 
They have turned My pleasant inheritance 
Into a desolate wilderness. 

11 They have made it a desolation, 

It moumeth, ah me ! all desolate. 
Desolate all is the land, 

And no man doth lay it to heart. 

12 Upon all the bare heights in the wilderness 

Spoilers have descended ; 
For the sword of Jehovah devours 
From one end of the land to another ; 
No peace is there for any. 

13 Wheat they have sown, but thorns they have reaped ; 

Their labour hath profited nothing ; 
Their harvest shall bring them to shame. 
Because of Jehovah's hot anger. 

58- 



Jeremiah 

Threat and Promise 

14 This is the word of Jehovah, 

To all Mine evil neighbours 
That put forth a hand on the heritage 

I gave to My people Israel. 
Behold ! I will pluck them away from their land, 

And the household of Judah I will pluck from the 
midst of them ; 

15 But when thus I have plucked them away, 

I will once more take pity upon them, 
And bring each man back to his heritage, 
Each to his own land again. 

16 And if ever they master the ways of My people. 

To swear by My name, " As Jehovah liveth," 
As they once taught My people to swear by the Baal, 
They shall then be built up in the midst of My people. 

17 But the nation that will not listen, 

I will pluck clean away and destroy, saith Jehovah. 

The Parable of the Waistcioth 

xiii. 

1 Jehovah told me to go and buy a linen waistcioth and 
put it on my loins, taking care not to let it get into 

2 water. So I bought a waistcioth, as Jehovah had 
bidden me, and I put it on my loins. 

3 Then a second message from Jehovah came to me, 

4 telling me to take the waistcioth I had bought, that 
was on my loins, and to proceed to Parah and bury it 

5 there in a chink of the rock. So I went and buried it 

6 at Parah, as Jehovah had charged me. Many days 
after, Jehovah told me to proceed to Parah and remove 

59 



Jeremiah 



the waistcloth which He had charged me to bury there. 

7 Then I went to Parah and dug out and took the Hnen 
waistcloth from the place where I had buried it ; and 
lo ! the waistcloth was ruined — it was good for 
nothing. 

8 Then there came to me this word from Jehovah : 

9 Thus saith Jehovah, Ruin Hke this I will bring upon the 

10 soaring pride of Judah and Jerusalem. As for these 
depraved people who, refusing to Hsten to My words, 
follow the dictates of their own stubborn hearts and 
indulge in the worship and service of other gods — let 
them become like this waistcloth, good for nothing. 

11 For, as the waistcloth clings to a man's loins, so would 
I have had the whole household of Israel and Judah 
cUng unto Me, saith Jehovah, to be My people, a 
source of renown and praise and glory : but they would 
not listen. 

The Parable of the Jars 

12 Take to them therefore this message : Thus saith 
Jehovah the God of Israel, " Every jar must be filled with 
wine." And if they say to thee, " Why, of course we 

13 know that every jar must be filled with wine," then this 
is what thou shalt say to them : Thus saith Jehovah : 
Soon — mark it well — I will fill with drunkenness all 
the inhabitants of this land — the kings that sit upon 
the throne of David, the priests, the prophets, and all 

14 the inhabitants of Jerusalem ; and I will dash them, 
saith Jehovah, one against another, fathers and sons 
together. I will neither spare nor pity : no compassion 
shall restrain Me from destroying them. 

60 



Jeremiah 



The Tender Solemn Warning 

15 O hear and give ear, be not haughty ; 

Jehovah hath spoken. 

16 To Jehovah your God give ye glory. 

Before it grows dark, 
And ere yet, on the mountains of twilight, 

With feet that are stumbling. 
Ye look for the light, which to gloom 

And thick darkness He turneth. 

17 But should ye refuse to give heed, 
Then in secret my soul shall weep, 

Because of your pride : 
And with tears that flow ever and ever 

Mine eyes shall run down 
For the flock of Jehovah, afar 

To captivity taken. 



Lament on the Approaching Fate of King 
Jehoiachin and the Queen Mother 

18 Say to the King and the Queen Mother, 

Low be ye seated ; 
For down from your head hath been hurled 
Your glorious crown. 

19 The towns in the south land* are shut, 

There is no one to open them ; 
All Judah is swept into exile. 
Swept all into exile. 

61 



Jeremiah 



Lament over the Sin and the Doom of Jerusalem 

20 Jerusalem,» lift up thine eyes and behold 

How they6 come from the north. 
Where is thy beautiful flock, 
Even the sheep that were given thee ? 

21 What wilt thou say when He calleth — 

To lord over thee — 
The men thou thyself didst instruct 

To approach thee as lovers ? 
Shall anguish not clutch at thee hard 

As of woman in travail ? 

22 But if in thy heart thou shouldst say, 

" Why is this come upon me ? " 
Thy manifold guilt is the cause 
That thy skirts are stripped off 
And thy modesty outraged. 

23 Can the African change his skin, 

Or the leopard his spots ? 
Just as helpless art thou to do good 
That art wont to do evil. 

24 And so to the winds of the desert 

Like stubble that flies I will scatter them. 

25 This is thy lot, this the portion 

I measure to thee, saith Jehovah ; 
Because thou forgattest Me, 
And hast trusted in falsehood. 

26 Thy skirt I Myself will hft over thy face. 

That thy shame may be seen. 
62 



Jeremiah 



27 Thine adulteries and thy neighings, 

Thy harlotry foul — 
In the field, on the hills, I have seen- 

Thy detestable doings. 
Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem ! 
How long time yet must pass 

Until thou be cleansed ? 



A Grievous Drought and the Thoughts it Awakened 
in the Prophet 

The Distress of the Drought 
xiv. 

1 The message which came from Jehovah to Jeremiah 

with regard to the drought. 

2 Judah doth mourn, and the gates thereof languish; 

(Her people) are sitting in black on the ground, 
And a cry rises up from Jerusalem. 

3 Her nobles have sent their attendants for water ; 

They come to the cisterns, no water they find : 
Back then they go with their pitchers empty, 
In shame and confusion they cover their heads. 

4 Dismayed are the men that till the ground, 

Because on the land no rain hath fallen ; 

The ploughmen cover their heads in confusion. 

5 Yea, even the hind in the field f orsaketh 

The young that she bore, because grass there is none. 

6 And the wild asses stand on the bleak bare heights, 

Panting for air, like the crocodile. 
And the light dieth out of their eyes. 
Because herbage there is none. 

63 



Jeremiah 



The Prophet's Supplication 

7 And yet though our sins rise in witness against us, 

Jehovah, O act, for Thine own name's sake ; 
For many a time have we turned from Thee back. 
And against Thee we have sinned. 

8 O Thou that art Israel's Hope, 

Her Saviour in time of trouble, 
Why like a stranger art Thou in Thy land. 

Like a traveller who turneth to lodge but a night ? 

9 Why shouldst Thou be hke a man fast asleep, 2 

Like a warrior powerless to save ? 
Yet Thou, O Jehovah, art here in our midst. 
By Thy name we are called : O leave us not. 

The Divine Answer 

10 Touching this people Jehovah thus answered : 
Thus do they love to wander 

With unrestrained feet, 
But Jehovah cannot accept them : 
Their guilt He now calleth to mind. 

And their sins He will visit with chastisement. 

11 And Jehovah said to me : Offer no prayer for the 

12 welfare of this people. When they fast, I will be deaf 
to their cry ; when they offer burnt-offerings and 
cereal offerings, I will not accept them. By sword, 
by famine, by pestilence, I will consume them. 

The Prophet's Remonstrance 

13 To this I made answer : Oh ! Lord Jehovah, see ! 
The prophets are ceaselessly teUing them that they will 

64 



Jeremiah 



never see the sword or suffer from famine, but that 
Thou wUt bestow upon them stable peace in this place. 

The Divine Answer 

14 Then Jehovah said to me : The prophets are but 
preaching lies in My name. I never sent them ; they 
have no commission from Me ; not a word have I 
spoken to them. What they preach to you is nothing 
but a tissue of lying visions and idle divinations and 

15 inventions of their own deceitful hearts. This there- 
fore is the message of Jehovah concerning those 
prophets who, without any commission from Me, are 
ceaselessly preaching that this land will never suffer 
from sword or famine : by sword and famine shall 

16 those very prophets themselves be consumed, and the 
people they preach to shall be flung out on the streets 
of Jerusalem as victims of sword and famine, and they 
shall lie unburied — themselves, their wives, their sons, 
their daughters ; for I will pour their wickedness over 
them. 

The Prophet's Lament and Confession 

17 This is the word thou shalt speak to them : 
Mine eyes run down with tears 

By night and day unceasing ; 
For the daughter of my people 
Is broken, grievously broken. 
With a wound exceeding sore. 

18 If to the field I go forth, 

Lo, the slain of the sword lie there ; 

65 



Jeremiah 



And if into the city I go, 

Lo, there lie the victims of famine : 
Yea, prophet and priest aUke, 

All witless, lie crouched* on the ground, 

19 Hast Thou utterly cast away Judah ? 

Is Zion grown loathsome to Thee ? 
Why hast Thou smitten us so. 

That we can find no healing ? 
We look for peace, but no good cometh : 

For a season of healing, but lo ! dismay. 

20 We acknowledge, Jehovah, our wickedness. 

The guilt of our fathers also ; 
For we have sinned against Thee. 

21 For Thy name's sake, O spurn us not, 

O shame not Thy glorious throne : 

O remember and break not Thy covenant with us. 

22 Of the worthless gods of the heathen 

Is there one that can bring down rain ?& 
Can the sky give showers of itself ? 
Is it not Thou alone that canst do this — 
Jehovah, our God, whom we wait for ? 
Yea, these things are all Thy creation. 



XV. 



The Divine Answer — Rejection and Doom 

Then Jehovah said to me : 
Though Moses and Samuel stood before Me,i 
Yet no leaning of heart could I have for this people ; 
Away with them out of My sight — let them go. 
66 



Jeremiah 



2 When they ask thee where they shall go. 

Then say to them, Thus saith Jehovah : 
To death, 2 those destined to death ; 

To the sword, those doomed to the sword ; 
To famine, those destined to famine. 

To exile, 3 those destined to exile. 

3 And I, saith Jehovah, will set over them four kinds 
(of destroyers) — the sword to slay, the dogs to tear, 
the birds of the air to devour, and the beasts of the 

4 earth to destroy ; and I will make them an object of 
consternation to every kingdom in the world, in return 
for all the evil wrought in Jerusalem by Manasseh,* 
the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah. 

5 O Jerusalem, who will then pity thee ? 

Who will commiserate thee ? 
Who will go out of his way 
To enquire how it fareth with thee ? 

6 Thou hast cast Me off, saith Jehovah, 

Thou ever wentest backward ; 
So, weary at length of relenting, 

I stretch out My hand to destroy thee. 

7 With winno wing-fork I will winnow thee, 

In every gate of the land. 
I will make My people childless. 

And destroy them because of their wickedness," 
8c A destroyer I will bring 

Upon mother and sucklings at noon-day ; 
I will bring of a sudden upon her 

Agitation and dismay. 

9 The mother of seven shall languish, 
And she shall swoon away ; 

67 



Jeremiah 



Her sun shall go down in the day-time, 
Ashamed and abashed shall she be. 
Sa Their widows are more in number 
b Than the sand of all the seas, 
ge And the rest of them I will deliver 
/ To the sword in the face of their foes. 

The Prophet's Passionate Lament 

10 Alaso for me ! mother of mine, that bore me 

To strive and to struggle with all the world. 
Never lender nor borrower was I,ii 
Yet one and all they curse me. 

11 To their curses be " Amen, Jehovah,** 

If ever I failed to entreat Thee 
For a blessing upon my foes 
In their time of distress and disaster. 12 

12 Is the arm in my shoulder of iron ? 

Or is my brow of brass Pi 

15 O Jehovah,i4 rememberis and visit me, 

Avenge me of my tormentors ; 
Let not Thine anger tarry, i 

Bethink Thee — it is in Thy cause 
That I have been laden with insult. 

16 They spurn Thy words — every man of them. 
But to me is Thy word a delight. 

The very joy of my heart ; 
For I have been called by Thy name, 
O Jehovah, Thou God of Hosts. 

17 No happy seat was mine 

At gatherings of the merry ; 
68 



Jeremiah 



But lonely I sat, for Thy hand was upon me 
With (holy) wrath Thou hast filled me. 
i8 Oh why is my pain unceasing ? 

And why is this wound of mine cureless ? 

Like a treacherous brook wilt Thou be unto me, 
Like waters that are unsure ? 



The Divine Answer 

19 Thus therefore saith Jehovah : 

If Thou turn again, i I will restore thee, 

And thou shalt be My servant. i 
Let thy speech but be noble, not petty, 20 

Ad so thou shalt be My mouthpiece ; 
They then may turn unto thee. 

But thou shalt not turn unto them. 

20 And unto this folk I will make thee 

A fortified wall of bronze. 
They will fight thee, but thou shalt be victor ; 
For I will be with thee to save thee,2i 
And rescue thee — thus saith Jehovah. 

21 Yes, I from the land of the wicked will rescue thee, 

I from the clutch of the cruel will redeem thee. 



Predictions of Coming Disaster 

The Prophet's Unutterable Loneliness 
xvi. 

1 There came to me this message from Jehovah : 

2 Thou shalt not take thee a wife, 

Saith Jehovah, the God of Israel ;i 
69 



Jeremiah 



Nor shalt thou have any sons 
Or daughters in this place. 

3 For thus Jehovah saith 

Concerning the sons and the daughters 
That in this place are born, 
And concerning the mothers that bore them, 
And the fathers that begat them :2 

4 "A grievous death shall they die, 

Unburied, unlamented ; 
Like dung on the face of the field shall they be, 

They shall perish by sword and famine ; 
By the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth 

Shall their corpses be devoured." 



The National Doom 

For thus Jehovah saith : 
Do not enter the house of grief. 

Nor go to make lament, 

And raise for them no wailing ; 

Because from this (My) people 
I have taken away My peace.  

Both great and small in this land shall die, 

They shall be unburied, unmourned ; 
Not a man shall gash his body,* 

Or shear his hair for them. 
No bread shall be broken for mourners. 

To comfort them for the dead ; 
Nor shall cup of consolation 

Be given for father or mother. 
70 



Jeremiah 



8 Do not enter the house of feasting, 

To sit with them, eating and drinking. 

9 For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

The God of Israel : 
Mark this — ye shall live to see it — 

This place I will bring to silence, 
The voice of mirth and gladness. 

The voice of bridegroom and bride. 

The Infidelity which Justifies the Doom 

10 After thou hast delivered this message to the people, 
they will ask thee why Jehovah has doomed them to all 
this misery. " What is our guilt," they will say, " and 
what is the sin we have committed against Jehovah our 

11 God ? " Tell them then, " Jehovah doth solemnly 
declare : it is because your fathers abandoned Me 
for the worship and the service of other gods ; yes, 

12 they abandoned Me and neglected My law. And 
your own behaviour has been worse than that of your 
fathers. See how every man of you is following the 
impulses of his own wicked and stubborn heart and 

13 refusing to listen to Me. For this, then, I will hurl you 
out of this land into a land that is strange to you and 
your fathers ; and there, day and night, ye shall serve 
other gods ; for no favour shall ye have from Me."» 

The Doom 

16 Behold, I will send many fishers, 6 

And them they shall fish, saith Jehovah ; 
And then will I send many hunters. 
And they shall hunt them down 

71 



Jeremiah 



From every mountain and hill 
And out of the clefts of the rocks. 
17 For Mine eyes are on all their ways, 

From My face they are not concealed, 
And their guilt is not hid from Mine eyes. 

18 I will therefore requite them double 

For all their guilt and sin. 
In profaning My land with the carcases 

Of their detestable idols, 
And filling Mine inheritance 

With their abominations. 
21 See then ! I will give them to feel — 

This once I will give them to feel — 
The weight of My mighty hand : 

And then shall they know that My name is Jehovah. 

Ultimate Recognition by the Heathen of Jehovah as the True 

God» 

19 O Jehovah, my strength and my stronghold. 

My refuge in time of trouble, 

To Thee from the ends of the earth 

Shall nations come and say, 

" Only lies have our fathers inherited, 

Empty and useless (idols)." 

20 Shall a man make gods for himself. 

Which yet are no gods at all ? 

The Doom 
xvii. 
I The sin of Judah is written 
With pencil of iron ; 

73 



Jeremiah 



With diamond point it is graven 

On the tablet of their heart. 
On the horns of their altars, 

On every green tree, 
On every high hill. 

On the heights in the field. 
Thy substance and all thy treasures 

As spoil I will give, 
In requital for all the sins 

That pervaded thy borders. 
And then thou shalt slack thy hold 

Of the land that I gave thee : 
I will make thee the slave of thy foes 

In a land that is strange to thee ; 
For a fire in Mine anger is kindled 

That bumeth for ever. 

The Joy and Wisdom of Trust 

Thus saith Jehovah : 

Accursed the man that trusteth in man. 

And maketh flesh his arm, 

While his heart is estranged from Jehovah. 
Like a bare desert shrub shall he be. 

No destiny fair shall be his ; 
His home is the scorching wilderness, 

A salt uninhabited land. 
But blessed the man that trusteth Jehovah, 

That maketh Jehovah his confidence ; 
Like a tree shall he be, by the waters planted,* 

That stretcheth its roots out towards the stream. 
And is never afraid for the coming of heat. 

But its leaves are for ever green — 
73 



Jeremiah 



In the year of drought untroubled — 
And it yieldeth fruit without ceasing. 

11 Like a partridge that sitteth on eggs 

That it hath not laid, 
Is the man that getteth him riches 

In ways unjust. 
In the midst of his days he must leave them, 

His end shall declare him a fool. 

12 A glorious throne, set on high from of old. 

Is the site where standeth our holy place.  

13 O Jehovah, Thou Hope of Israel, 

Put to shame shall all be that forsake Thee 
Yea, they that prove faithless to Thee 

In the land shall be put to confusion ;  
Because they have forsaken 

The Fountain of Living Water. 7 

The Prophet's Prayer 

9 " The hearts is most treacherous of all things, 

And sick beyond cure : who can know it ? " 
10 " I, Jehovah, am Searcher of hearts. 
And Tester of thoughts am I, 
To give each what his doings have earned. 
To let each reap the fruit of his deeds." 

14 " Heal me, Jehovah, and I shall be healed ; 

Save me, and I shall be saved indeed : 
For Thou art my Praise. 

15 Mark how they say to me ceaselessly 

' Where is the word of Jehovah ? 
Pray, now, let it come to pass.' 

74 



Jeremiah 



i6 Yet never for this did I urge Thee 

To bring on the evil day,io 
Nor ever have longed in my heart 

For the day of disaster — Thou knowest. 
The words that came forth from my lips 

Lie open before Thy face. 

17 O be not a terror to me, 

Thou Refuge of mine in the day of evil. 

18 Confusion on them that torment me — 

On them, but not on me : 
Be dire dismay upon them — 

On them, but not on me ; 
Bring the day of disaster upon them, 

With two-fold destruction destroy them." 

The Sanctity of the Sabbath 

19 Jehovah commanded me to go and take my stand at 
the Benjamin gate,i2 through which the kings of Judah 

20 go in and out, and at all the gates of Jerusalem, and 
there He charged me to address them as follows : "Ye 
kings of Judah, and all ye citizens of Judah and 

21 Jerusalem that pass through these gates. Thus saith 
Jehovah : As ye value your lives, be very careful not 
to carry a burden or to bring anything of the kind 
through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day ; 

22 also to carry no load out of your houses on the 
Sabbath day, and to do no work of any kind, but to keep 
the Sabbath day holy, as I commanded your forefathers. 

23 But instead of obediently inclining their ear, they 
stiffened their neck ; they would have nothing to 

24 do with obedience or discipline. If you, however, 
will give earnest heed to Me, saith Jehovah, and 

75 



Jeremiah 



refrain from bringing loads through the city gates on the 
Sabbath day, if you keep the Sabbath day holy and 

25 abstain from work of every kind, then kings that 
sit upon the throne of David shall enter the gates of 
this city riding on chariots and horses, accompanied 
by their princes, the men of Judah, and the citizens of 
Jerusalem ; and the city shall be inhabited for ever. 

26 From the cities of Judah, the neighbourhood of 
Jerusalem, and the district of Benjamin, from the low- 
land, the hill country, and the south, i men shall come 
to the Temple with burnt-offerings and sacrifices, 

27 oblations and frankincense, and praise-offerings. If, 
however, you refuse to give heed to Me and to keep the 
Sabbath day holy by refraining from carrying burdens 
through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, 
then I will kindle in her gates a fire unquenchable, that 
shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem. 

The Lesson of the Potter and the Clay 
xviii. 

1 Jeremiah received from Jehovah the message which 

2 follows : " Rise and go down to the potter's house — 
I have somewhat to say to thee, which I will com- 

3 municate to thee there." So I went down to the 
potter's house : and there he was — engaged on a 

4 piece of work at the wheel. Now, if the thing he was 
making was spoiled in his hands, he would just shape 
the material over again into another such vessel as he 
had decided to make. 

5 Thereupon there flashed upon me this message from 

6 Jehovah. " Cannot I," He said, " deal with you, 
household of Israel, like this potter ? You are 

76 



Jeremiah 



in My hand just like the clay in the potter's hand.i 

7 At one moment I may decide to pluck up or break 

8 down and destroy some nation or kingdom ; but 
if the nation whose fate I have decreed turn from its 
wickedness, then I relent and do not execute the doom 

9 I had planned for it. At another moment I may 
decide to build up or to plant some nation or kingdom ; 

10 but if its behaviour displeases Me, if it refuses to listen 
to My voice, then I will retract the favours I had 
intended to confer upon it. 

11 Now, therefore, make this announcement to the men 
of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem, Thus saith 
Jehovah : Beware ! I am shaping2 calamity for you, I 
am fashioning plans for your discomfiture. Turn, then, 
every man of you, from your evil ways, and amend your 

12 life and behaviour." But they will say, " No, there 
is no hope of that : rather will we follow devices of our 
own and yield, every man of us, to the impulses of our 
wicked and stubborn hearts." 

13 Thus therefore saith Jehovah : 
Ask any heathen man 

If he ever heard aught like this ? 
An utterly horrible thing 

Hath been wrought by the Virgin of Israel. 

14 Doth. the white snow vanish from Sirion's* crags ? 

Do the rills that flow cold from the hills ever dry ? 

15 Yet Me hath My people forgotten ; 

The gods that they worship are phantoms. 
They have stumbled upon the way 

Ordained for them of old. 
And turned into bypaths 

That never were truly laid. 

n 



Jeremiah 



i6 So their land shall be made a horror — 
An everlasting scorn. 
It shall fill every traveller with horror — 
Thereat he will shake his head, 

17 I will scatter them like the sirocco 

Before the face of their foes. 
Not My face, but My back, will I show them. 
In the day of their calamity. 

Plots against Jeremiah 

The Plots 

18 Then said they, " Come, let us forge 

A plot against Jeremiah. 
For the priests will not lack for instruction to offer, 

Nor the wise men for counsel to render, 

Nor the prophet for words to declare. 
Come, with the tongue let us smite him. 

Let us watch hira in all that he says." 

Jeremiah's Prayer 

19 O Jehovah, give heed unto me. 

And hearken to my contention. 

20 Shall evil be rendered for good 

That a pit they have dug for my life ? 
Call to mind how I stood before Thee, 
To utter a prayer for their welfare,  
And to turn Thy fury from them. 

21 Abandon Thou therefore their children to famine, 

Dehver them up to the sword ; 

78 



Jeremiah 



Let their wives become childless widows, 
Let their men be slain of death,i« 
And their youths may the sword smite in battle. 

22 Let a cry ring out from their houses, 

When swiftly Thou bringest the raiders upon them : 
For a pit they have dug to take me. 
And snares they have hid for my feet. 

23 For well, O Jehovah, Thou knowest 

How they plotted against me to slay me. 
O pardon not their guilt, 

And blot not their sin from Thy sight. 
Let them prostrate be hurled before Thee ; 

Deal Thou with them in the time of Thine anger. 

The Lesson of the Broken Flask and its 

Consequences for Jeremiah 
xix. 

The Breaking of the Flask Symbolical of the Shattering of 
the Nation 

1 Theni Jehovah commanded me to go and buy a 
potter's earthenware flask, and, accompanied by a few 

2 elders of the people and a few priests, to proceed 
to the Valley of the son of Hinnom2 by the entry of the 
Potsherd gate, and there announce the message with 

3 which He would charge me. And the message was 
this : " Listen, ye kings of Judah, and ye citizens of 
Jerusalem, to what Jehovah is about to say : Thus 
saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : Mark 
this well. I will soon bring such a catastrophe upon 
this place as will make the ears of all who hear of it 

4 tingle ; because they have forsaken Me and de- 
nationalised this place by their burnt-offerings to other 

79 



Jeremiah 



gods, strange alike to them and their forefathers ; 
and the kings of Judah have filled this place with the 

5 blood of innocent men. They have built Baal 
sanctuaries to bum their sons in the fire as offerings to 
Baal, though this was no commandment of Mine — such 

6 a thing never entered into My mind. Mark this, 
therefore : days are coming, saith Jehovah, when this 
place shall be no more called Topheth, nor the Valley 
of the son of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter ; 

7 and I will spill upon the ground the wisdom of Judah 
and Jerusalem in this place. I will lay them low by 
the sword of their enemies and by the hands of those 
that seek their life : their dead bodies I will give to the 
birds of the air and the beasts of the earth to devour. 

8 And I will make this city a horror and a scorn ; all 
that pass by her shall be filled with horror and with 

9 scorn at all the blows that I shall rain upon her. I 
will drive them to eat the flesh of their sons and 
daughters : in the stress of the siege to which they shall 
be reduced by their enemies and by those that seek 
their life, they will devour one another. 

10 Then thou shalt break the flask in the presence of 

11 the men that accompany thee, and thou shalt say to 
them. Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : This is how I will 
shatter this people and this city, just as a potter's 
jar is shattered beyond all possibility of repair ; and 
Topheth shall be used as a burying-place for want of 

12 room (elsewhere). 7 This is how I will deal, saith 
Jehovah, with this place and its inhabitants — I will 

13 make this city like Topheth ; and the houses of 
Jerusalem and of the kings of Judah shall be, hke the 
place of Topheth, defiled — all the houses, that is, 

80 



Jeremiah 



from whose roofs the smoke of sacrifice has ascended 
to the host of heaven, and drink-offerings have been 
poured out to other gods. 

Jeremiah Put in the Stocks for his Preaching 

14 Then Jeremiah returned from Topheth to which 
Jehovah had sent him on his prophetic errand ; and, 
taking his stand in the Temple court he thus addressed 

15 the assembled people : " Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 
the God of Israel, Mark this well ; soon I will bring 
upon this city and upon all her villages the full measure 
of disaster with which I have threatened her, because 
they have stiffened their necks and refused to listen 

XX. to My words." 

1 Now when Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest, 
who had the general supervision of the Temple, heard 

2 this prophetic utterance of Jeremiah's, he beat him 
and put him in the stocks that were at the upper 

3 Benjamin gate in the Temple. Next day, after 
Pashhur had released Jeremiah from the stocks, 
Jeremiah said to him, " Thy name is (henceforth) 

4 changed from Pashhur to Terror. 1 For thus saith 
Jehovah : See ! I will make thee a terroi; to thyself 
and to all thy friends. They shall fall by the enemy's 
sword, and thou shalt see it with thine own eyes. I 
will give the whole of Judah into the hands of the 
king of Babylon, and he shall carry them to exile in 

5 Babylon and slay them with the sword. And all the 
resources of this city, all her wealth, all that she prizes, 
all the treasures of the kings of Judah, I will deliver 
into the hands of their enemies, who shall despoil them 

81 



J eremiah 



and carry them off to Babylon. As for thee, Pashhur, 
thou and all who share thy home shall be swept into 
captivity. To Babylon thou shalt come ; there 
thou shalt die, and there shalt thou be buried — thou 
and all the friends to whom thou hast prophesied Ues." 



Jeremiah*s Irresistible Impulse to Preach 

What it Cost 

7 O Jehovah, Thou hast beguiled me, 

And I let myself be beguiled ; 
Too strong for me art Thou, 

And Thou hast won the victory. 
All the day long am I ridiculed, 

Every one mocketh at me. 

8 Every word that I utter is laughed at ;2 

" Wronged " and " despoiled " must I cry. 

For to me is the word of Jehovah 
An endless reproach and derision. 

9 When I vow to put it out of my mind 

And to speak in His name no more, 
It doth bum in my heart like a fire 

Shut up within my bones ; 
I am weary of enduring. 

And I can bear it no more. 

10 For I hear their many whispers — 
A terror on every side — 
" Denounce him." " Yes, we will denounce him." 
" All ye his familiar friends, 

82 



Jeremiah 



Keep a narrow watch  for his stumbling, 

Perchance he will be beguiled, 
And we shall prevail against him. 

And take our vengeance upon him." 

The Prophet's Sense of Divine Support 

11 But Jehovah Himself is with me, 

As a mighty One and a terrible ; 
So my persecutors shall stumble. 

And they shall not prevail ; 
But because they have dealt unwisely, 

They shall come to utter shame. 
To perpetual confusion, 

Which never shall be forgotten. 

12 O Jehovah that triest the righteous, 

That mind and heart dost behold. 
Let me see Thy vengeance upon them ; 
For on Thee have I rolled my cause. 

13 Sing to Jehovah, sing praise to Jehovah : 

For He hath delivered the soul of the needy 
From the hand of evil-doers. 

The Prophet's Despair 

14 A curse on the day whereon I was bom, 

Unblest be the day that my mother bore me. 

15 A curse on the man who announced to my father 

" A man child is born to thee " — making him glad. 

16 Let the fate of that man be the fate of the cities 

O'erthrown by Jehovah in pitiless anger ; 
Let him hear in the morning a cry (of distress) 7 
And at noon the alarum of war : 

83 



Jeremiah 



17 That he slew me not in the womb, 

So my mother had been my grave, 
And her womb had been great for ever. 

18 O why came I forth from the womb 
To behold but labour and sorrow, 

That my days should be wasted with shame ? 

Jeremiah Warns King Zedekiah that the 

Babylonians will Capture Jerusalem 
xxi. 

1 The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, 
when King Zedekiah sent the following request to him 
through Pashhur, the son of Malchiah and Zephaniah, 

2 the son of Maaseiah the priest. " Be good enough," they 
said, " to enquire of Jehovah on our behalf : for 
Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon is fighting against 
us. Perhaps Jehovah will so deal with us in His own 
wonderful way that the siege will be raised." 

3 To the deputation Jeremiah replied : " Take this 

4 answer back to Zedekiah. Thus saith Jehovah, the 
God of Israel : Now you are able to fight outside the 
wall with the king of Babylon and the Chaldeans who 
are besieging you ; but soon I will drive you with the 

5 weapons you handle inside this city. And I myself 
will fight against you with outstretched hand and 
mighty arm — in anger, in fury, and in towering wrath. 

6 Yes, I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man 

7 and beast, with a great and deadly pestilence. There- 
after, saith Jehovah, Zedekiah, king of Judah and his 
ministers and the people in this city that survive the 
pestilence, sword and famine, I will deUver into the 
hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and into 

84 



Jeremiah 



the hands of their enemies, and into the hands of those 
that seek their Ufe ; and they shall smite them with 
the edge of the sword without mercy, compassion, or 
pity. 

8 To the people thy message shall be this. Thus saith 
Jehovah : See ! I set before you the way of life and the 

9 way of death. Whoever remains in this city shall die 
by sword, famine, or pestilence ; but whoever goes out 
and surrenders to the Chaldeans that besiege you shall 
be spared, though he shall escape with nothing but 

10 his life. For, saith Jehovah, I have set My face against 
this city for evil and not for good ; into the hands of the 
king of Babylon it shall be given, and he shall burn it 
with fire. 

11 To the royal house of Judah thy message shall be 
this. 

Hear ye the word of Jehovah. 

12 O household of David, thus saith Jehovah : 
In the morning give righteous judgment, 

DeUver the man that is plundered 
From the clutch of his oppressor : 
Lest My fury break forth like fire 
And blaze unquenchably. 
Because of your evil doings. 

13 Behold, I am against thee, 2 

Thou denizen of the vale 
And the rock of the plain, saith Jehovah : 
Ye who say, ' Who can come down against us 
And find his way into our lairs ? ' 

14 I will punish you, saith Jehovah ; 

The fruit of your deeds ye shall reap i- 

85 



Jeremiah 



I will kindle a fire in her forest 
Which round and round will devour." 

Jeremiah's Judgment on the Kings of Judah 
xxii. Solemn Warning 

1 Jehovah commanded me to go down to the palace 
of the king of Judah and there deUver the following 

2 message : O king of Judah that sittest on the throne of 
David, listen to the word of Jehovah — thou and thy 
ministers and thy people who enter these gates. 

3 Thus saith Jehovah : Conduct your administration on 
principles of justice and right, deliver the victims 
of exploitation from the clutch of the oppressor, refrain 
from all wrong and violence to the resident alien, the 
fatherless and the widow, and shed no innocent blood 

4 in this place. If you carry out this policy faithfully, 
then kings upon the throne of David shall pass through 
the gates of this house, riding in chariots and on horses 

5 — they, their ministers and their people. But if you 
ignore this message (of Mine), then, saith Jehovah, I 
solemnly sweari that this house shall be laid in ruins. 

6 For thus saith Jehovah concerning the palace of the 
king of Judah : 

Though thou art to Me as Gilead, 

Or the (thick- wooded) summit of Lebanon, 2 

I will turn thee into a desert, 
An uninhabited city. 

7 I will dedicate men to destroy thee, 

Every one with his weapons ; 
They shall fell thy choicest cedars. 
And hurl them into the fire. 
86 



Jeremiah 



8 The people of many nations, as they pass by this city, 
shall ask one another why Jehovah has dealt thus with 

9 this great city, and they shall answer : It is because 
they abandoned their covenant with Jehovah their 
God and gave themselves up to the worship and service 
of other gods. 

On Jehoahaz 

10 Weep not for him that is dead, 

And mourn not for him ; 
But weep rather for him that is gone,* 

For he cometh no more : 
And the land of his birth he shall see 

Nevermore. 

11 For this is the word of Jehovah concerning Shallum, 
the son of Josiah, king of Judah, the successor of his 

. father Josiah, who went forth from this place : "He 

12 shall never come back to it again ; but in the land of 
exile to which they have carried him he shall die, and 
this land he shall see no more." 

On Jehoiakim 

13 Woe to him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, 

And his chambers by injustice, 
That serveth himself of his neighbour for nothing. 
And giveth him not his wages — 

14 That saith, " I will build me a spacious house. 

And roomy chambers and windows broad. 
With panels of cedar, and painted vermilion." 

15 Do great cedar palaces make thee a king ? 
Did not thy father eat and drink. 

And enjoy his measure of good things ? 

87 



Jeremiah 



Yet justice and right did he also dispenses 
i6 And he cared for the cause of the poor and the needy. 
Is not that true knowledge of Me, saith Jehovah ? 

17 But thou hast neither eyes nor heart 

For aught save thine own mean profit, 
The shedding of innocent blood, 

And the practice of wrong and oppression. 

18 This, therefore, is the message of Jehovah to Jehoia- 

kim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah : 

Woe unto this mano Jehoiakim ! 
No one for him shall lament 

"O brother of mine," " O sister." 
No one for him shall lament 

" Ah lord ! " " Alas for his glory." 

19 But burial Hke that of an ass shall be his — 

Dragged along and flung forth 
Beyond the gates of Jerusalem. 

On Jehoiachin 

20 Get theeii up to Lebanon and cry. 

And lift up thy voice in Bashan ; 
Cry from the hills of Abarim,i2 

For all that thou lovest is shattered. 

21 In the days of good fortune I spoke to thee, 

But thou didst refuse to listen ; 
And such hath thy way been from youth. 
To my voice thou hast never hearkened. 

22 All thy shepherds like sheep by the wind shall be driven,! 

And those whom thou lovest shall captive depart ; 
Shame and confusion shall then be thy doom, 
In requital for all thy wickedness. 
88 



Jeremiah 



23 O thou that inhabitest Lebanon, 

Nestled amongst the cedars, 
How wilt thou groani* when thy pangs come upon thee. 
Thy pain as of woman in travail ! 

24 As truly as I live, saith Jehovah, though Coniah,i5 
the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were the signet- 
ringi6 on thy right hand, yet I would tear him off. 

25 Yea, I will deliver thee into the hands of those that 
seek thy life, and into the hands of those thou dreadest, 
into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, 

26 and into the hands of the Chaldeans. Yea, thee and 
the mother that bore thee I will hurl into another land 
than the land thou wast bom in, and there thou shalt 

27 die. Nevermore shall they return to the land to which 
they long to return. 

28 Hath this man Coniah become 

Like a figurei7 one smasheth in scorn. 
Or a vessel that no man doth care for ? 
Why hath he been cast forth, is 
And hurled to a land that was strange to him ? 

29 O land, land, land. 

Hear thou the word of Jehovah. 

30 Thus saith Jehovah : 

Write this man down as childless ; i9 

For none of his seed shall be honoured 
To sit on the throne of David 

Or rule any more over Judah. 

Unfaithful Rulers to be Succeeded by those that are Faithful 
xxiii. 
I Woe to the shepherds that ruin and scatter 
The flock that was theirs to pasture. 

89 



Jeremiah 



Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, 

Concerning the shepherds that tend my people : 
Ye have scattered My flock and driven them away, 

And ye have not visited them ; 
I therefore will visit you 

For the wickedness of your doings. 
I will gather My flock that is left 

From the countries to which I have driven them ; 
I will bring them back to their homesteads. 

And they shall be fruitful and multiply. 
I will raise up shepherds to tend them : 

No fear or dismay or terrori 

Shall they know any more, saith Jehovah. 

Promise of the Ideal King, or Messiah 

Behold, saith Jehovah, in the days that are coming 

I will raise up to David a righteous shoot, 
Who shall reign as King, and behave with wisdom, 

And execute justice and right in the land. 
In his days shall Judah be crowned with salvation, 

And Israel in safety shall dwell ; 
And this is the name men shall call him — 

" Our Champion is Jehovah." 

Therefore, behold, saith Jehovah, days are coming 
when men shall no more say, " As surely as Jehovah 
liveth who brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt," 
but " As surely as Jehovah Uveth who brought the race 
of the household of Israel from the north country and 
from all the countries to which He had driven them " ; 
and thev shall dwell in their own land. 



90 



Jeremiah 

Jeremiah's Judgment on the Prophets 

The Character and Fate of the False Prophets 

9 Concerning the prophets. 

My heart within me is broken. 

My bones are all grown soft ; 
Like a drunken man am I, 

Like a man overcome of wine, 
By reason of Jehovah 

And of His glorious majesty.- 

10 For the land is full of adulterers 

Who run an evil course. 

And whose might is not of right. 

11 For prophet and priest are profane : 

Their wickedness I have witnessed 
In Mine own very house, saith Jehovah. 

12 The way they must tread shail be therefore 

As sHppery ground in the darkness. 
Whereon they are thrust till they fall : 
For I will bring evil upon them — 
The year of their visitation. 

13 In Samaria's prophets I witnessed 

Behaviour that was revolting ;7 
They prophesied by the Baal 
And seduced My people Israel. 

14 But a horrible thing have I seen 

In the prophets of Jerusalem — 
Adultery, walking in falsehood, 
And strengthening the hands of the wicked. 
That no man doth turn from his wickedness. 



Jeremiah 



They are all of them grown like Sodom, 
And her citizens like Gomorrah. 

15 Thus therefore concerning the prophets 

Declareth Jehovah of Hosts : 
Behold ! I will feed them with wormwood, 

And gall will I give them to drink ; 
For from Jerusalem's prophets there spreadeth 

Impiety over the land. 

The Promises are False, because the Prophets are not 
Divinely Inspired 

16 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 

Hearken not to the words of the prophets ; 
They fill you with hopes that are vain. 
'Tis their own heart's vision they utter, 
And not what Jehovah hath spoken. 

17 They assure those who mock at the word of Jehovah 

That all with them shall be well. 
They assure those who follow their own stubborn hearts 
That no evil shall come upon them. 

18 But which of them ever hath stood and looked on 

In the council of Jehovah ? 
Or which of them ever hath listened 
And heard any word of His ? 

21 I sentio not the prophets, and yet they ran ; 

Notwithstanding I spoke not to them, yet they 
prophesied. 

22 But if ever they truly had stood in My council 

And heard any word that was Mine, 
My people they would have turned 
From their evil ways and behaviour. 
92 



Jeremiah 



Inescapable Doom of the False Prophets 

23 Am 1,11 saith Jehovah, a God that is nigh, 

And not a God afar ? 

24 Can any man hide, saith Jehovah, 

In secretj where I cannot see him ? 
Do not I fill heaven and earth ? 

25 I have heard what the prophets say. 

That prophesy lies in My name ; 
" I have dreamed, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. "12 

26 Will the heart of the prophets not turn 

That prophesy lies, and that prophesy 
Nought but their own heart's delusions, 

27 And think to drive My name 
Clean out of the minds of My people 

By the dreams that they tell one another, 
As erst by the Baal My name 

Was driven from the mind of their fathers ? 

28 The prophet that hath a dream — 

Let him declare his dream : 
And he that hath My word — 

Let him faithfully utter My word. 
What hath straw, saith Jehovah, to do with the wheat ? 

29 Is not My word Hke a fire. 

Like a hammer that shatters the rocks ? 

30 Mark this, therefore, saith Jehovah, I am against 
the prophets that steal My words from one another. 1* 

31 I am against the prophets who take their tongues 

32 and immediately reel off an oracle. I am against the 
prophets that prophesy lying dreams, seducing My 
people by their lies and their windy boasts. They have 

93 



Jeremiah 



not been sent by Me, nor have they any commission 
from Me, and to this people they bring no sort of gain 
whatever. 

The " Burden " of the Lord No More 

33 When a layman or a prophet or a priest asketh thee 
what is the burden 6 of Jehovah, tell them, " You,'' 
saith Jehovah, " are the burden, and I will cast you off. 

34 As for the prophet, the priest, or the la5mian, who 
speaks any more of Jehovah's 'burden,', that man and 

35 his household I will visit with judgment. You must 
say to one another, ' What is Jehovah's ansiverl ' or 

36 ' What is Jehovah's message ? ' But you are not to 
make mention of the burden of Jehovah any more. 
Every man's own (uninspired) word shall be his 
burden 17 ; for you have perverted the words of the 

38 Hving God, Jehovah of Hosts, our God. If,i8 however, 
you persist in speaking of * the burden of Jehovah,' 
Jehovah pronounces this word of doom : Because you 
persist in using this expression ' burden of Jehovah,' 
despite My expUcit command to you not to use it, 

39 I will lift you up and cast you out of My sight — you 

40 and the city I gave to you and your fathers, and I 
will lay upon you everlasting reproach and unending 
disgrace which shall never be forgotten." 

The Baskets of Figs and their Meaning 
xxiv. 

I After Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, 
with the princes, the craftsmen and the smiths, had been 
carried from Jerusalem by Nebuchadrezzar, king of 

94 



Jeremiah 



Babylon, into exile in Babylon, Jehovah in a vision 
showed me two baskets of figs set down in front of 

2 Jehovah's Temple. One basket contained excellent 
figs, Hke the figs that are first ripe : the figs in the other 
were very bad, so bad that they could not be eaten. 

3 Then Jehovah said to me, " What seest thou, Jere- 
miah ? " And I answered, " Figs — the good figs very 
good, and the bad very bad, so bad that they cannot be 
eaten." 

4 Thereupon this message came to me from Jehovah, 

5 " Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel : As with these 
good figs, so will I regard with favour the e:dles of 
Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land 

6 of the Chaldeans. I will set Mine eyes upon them for 
good, and bring them back to this land. I will not pull 
them down, but I will build them ; I will not pluck them 
up, but I will plant them ; and I will give them a heart 
to understand me, that I am Jehovah. They shall be 
My people and I will be their God, if they turn to Me 
with all their heart. 

8 As for the figs that were too bad to eat. Thus saith 
Jehovah : They are symbolic of the fate of Zedekiah, 
king of Judah, and his princes, and the survivors of 
Jerusalem that are left in this land, and those whose 

9 home is in the land of Egypt. For I will make them 
an object of consternation among every kingdom in 
the world, a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a 
curse, in every place to which I shall drive them ; 

10 and I will send among them sword, famine and pesti- 
lence, till they perish from the land that I gave to them 
and their forefathers. 



95 



Jeremiah 



The Divine Judgment to be Executed by the Baby- 
lonians upon Judah, upon the Neighbouring 
Nations, and upon the World at Large 

Prophetic Warning Disregarded by the People 

XXV. 

1 The message which came to Jeremiah concerning all 
the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim.i 
the son of Josiah, king of Judah, which was the first 

2 year of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon — the mes- 
sage he2 delivered to all the people of Judah and all 
the citizens of Jerusalem : 

3 For twenty-three years — from the thirteenth year 
of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, up to this 
day — the message of Jehovah has been coming to me, 
and I have declared it to you early and late, but you 

4 have not listened. And early and late Jehovah has 
been sending to you all His servants the prophets, 
though you have not listened nor inclined an attentive 

5 ear. My message was this : " If you abandon, every 
man of you, your wicked ways and your evil behaviour, 
then you shall dwell for ever in the land which Jehovah 
gave in the ancient time to you and your forefathers. 

6 But do not indulge in the worship or service of other 
gods, and do not provoke Jehovah with the fabri- 
cations of your own hands : this can only injure your- 

7 selves." But you have not Ustened tome.  

Judgment upon Judah and Her Neighbours 

8 Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : Because 

9 ye have not listened to My words, I will send and 
fetch a clan from the north, 7 and I will bring them 

96 



Jeremiah 



against this land and its inhabitants and against the 
surrounding nations. I will devote them to destruc- 
tion so appalling that men shall hiss and revile them 

10 for ever ; and I will banish from them the voice of mirth 
and gladness, the voice of bridegroom and bride, the 
sound of the millstones and the light of the lamp. 

11 This whole land shall be a waste and a horror, and 
these nations shall serve the king of Babylon for seventy 
years. 

12 When,i" however, seventy years are completed, I will punish 
the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith Jehovah, for their 
guilt, and also the land of the Chaldeans, which I will make 

13 desolate for ever ; and I will bring upon that land all the words 
I have pronounced against it — everything prophesied by 
Jeremiah against all the nations, that is recorded in this Book. 

14 They, yes they, shall be reduced to slavery at the hands of 
many nations and of great kings, and I will give them the reward 
that their acts and deeds deserve. 

The Cup of Jehovah's Fury to he Drunk hy all Nations 

15 For thus said Jehovah, the God of Israel, to me, 
" Take from My hand this wine-cup of wrath, and give 
it to all the nations to whom I send thee to drink from ; 

16 and let them drink and reel in madness because of the 

17 sword that I will send among them." So I took the 
cup from the hand of Jehovah, and I gave it to all the 
nations to whom Jehovah had sent me, to drink from — 

18 Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, with her kings and 
princes, to be made a desolation, a horror, a scorn, 

19 and a curse ;ii Pharaoh, king of Egypt, with his 

20 ministers, his princes, and all his people, and all 
the foreign folk ;i2 all the kings of the land of Uz,i8 and 

97 



Jeremiah 



all the kings of the land of the Philistines — Ashkelon, 

21 Gaza, Ekron, and the survivors of Ashdod ; Edom, 

22 Moab, and Ammon ; all the kings of Tyre and Sidon ; 
and the kings of the coast-land across the sea ; i* 

23 Dedan and Tema and Buz,i5 and all those that have the 

24 corners of their hair clipped ; all the kings of Northern 
Arabia, and all the kings of the foreign folk who dwell 

25 in the wilderness ; all the kings of Zimri and Elami 

26 and Media ; all the kings of the north, far and near, 
one with another, and all the kingdoms on the face of 
the earth ; and after them shall the king of Sheshach 
drink. 

27 Thou shalt say to them. Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 
the God of Israel : Drink yourselves drunk till ye fall in 
your vomit, to rise no more, because of the sword that I 

28 shall send among you. If they refuse to take the cup from 
thy hand to drink, then thou shalt say to them. Thus saith 

29 Jehovah of Hosts : Drink it you shall ; for, if the city 
which is called by Mine own name is the first to feel the 
weight of My displeasure, how can you expect to go 
utterly unpunished ? Nay, verily, ye shall not escape ; 
for I am summoning the sword upon all the inhabitants 
of the earth, saith Jehovah of Hosts. 

30 As for thee, let thy prophetic message to them be 
this : 

Jehovah will roar from on high. 

He will utter His voice from His holy abode ; 

Against His own fold He will mightily roar. 
He will Uf t a " hurrah " like the men at the vintage 
Against those that dwell on the earth, every one. 

31 The din shall reach to the end of the earth, 

For Jehovah doth hold a dispute with the nations ; 

98 



Jeremiah 



Yea, He with all flesh will contend in judgment, 
And those that are base He will give to the sword. 

32 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 

See ! misery spreadeth from nation to nation ; 
From the uttermost comers of earth 
There stirreth a mighty tempest. 

33 That day the slain of Jehovah shall lie 

From one end of the earth to the other, 
Unmourned, ungathered, unburied. 
As dung on the face of the ground. 

34 Howl, ye shepherds, and cry. 

And roll you in ashes, ye lords of the flock ; 
For the days are ripe for your slaughter. 
Like lambs that are doomed is shall ye fall. 

35 No escape shall be left for the shepherds. 

No flight for the lords of the flock. 

36 O hark to the cry of the shepherds, 

The howl of the lords of the flock ; 
For Jehovah destroyeth their pasture. 

37 The meadows, so peaceful, are hushed 

At the fierce hot wrath of Jehovah. 

38 The lions have lefti their covert. 

For the land is become a desert. 
Because of the cruel sword. 

And because of His fierce hot anger. 

Jeremiah on Trial for his Life 

xxvi. 

1 In the beginning of the reign 2 of Jehoiakim, the son of 
Josiah, king of Judah, the message which follows came 

2 (to Jeremiah) from Jehovah : Thus saith Jehovah, 
Take thy stand in the Temple court, and declare with- 

99 



Jeremiah 



out reservation to all the people of Judah who are come 
to worship in the Temple, the whole message that I 

3 have commissioned thee to declare. It may be that 
they will hsten and severally abandon their wicked 
ways : if they do, I will relent and not bring upon them 
the calamity I am planning as penalty for their evil 

4 behaviour. This, then, is what thou art to say to 
them. Thus saith Jehovah : If ye refuse to obey Me — 
to live in accordance with the law that I have set before 

5 you, and to listen, as ye have never yet listened, to the 
words of My servants the prophets, whom early and 

6 late I have been sending to you — then I will make this 
Temple like Shiloh, and as for this city, I will turn it 
into an object of execration to every nation in the world. 

7 Now the audience that listened to this message of 
Jeremiah's in the Temple included not only the whole 
body of the people, but the priests and the prophets 

8 as well. So when he had concluded the message which 
Jehovah had commissioned him to declare to the whole 

9 people, the priests and the prophets seized him. " You 
must die," they exclaimed ; "for how dare you 
deUver in the name of Jehovah such a message as this, 
that this Temple will meet the fate of Shiloh, and that 
this city shall become an uninhabited desolation ? " 
At this juncture all the people began to crowd round 
Jeremiah in the Temple. 

10 Now echoes of this tumult having reached the ears 
of the courtiers of Judah, they proceeded from the 
palace up to the Temple ; and after they had taken 
their seats at the entrance to the new gate of the Temple, 

11 the priests and the prophets addressed themselves to 
the courtiers and the whole body of the people. " This 

100 



Jeremiah 



man," they said, " is guilty of a capital offence ; for 
he has solemnly declared that this city is doomed — 

12 you have heard him with your own ears. Then 
Jeremiah in his turn addressed himself to the courtiers 
and to the whole body of the people. " It is Jehovah 
Himself," he said, " that has sent me to proclaim upon 
this Temple and city the doom which you have just 

13 heard. If, however, you amend your life and con- 
duct, and listen to the voice of Jehovah your God, then 
He will relent and cancel His threat of catastrophe. 

14 As for myself, I am in your hands : deal with me as 

15 you think right and proper. But be very sure of this, 
that, if you put me to death, you will only be bringing 
innocent blood upon yourselves, upon this city, and 
upon her people ; for it is the simple truth that Jehovah 
has sent me to deli ver this message in your hearing. " 

16 Thereupon, the courtiers and all the people said to the 
priests and the prophets, " This man is not guilty of 
any capital offence ; for his message to us has behind 
it the authority of Jehovah our God." 

17 Then some of the elders, rising to their feet, thus ad- 

18 dressed the people assembled : " In the days of Hezekiah, 
king of Judah,"6 they said, " Micah of Moresheth was 
prophesying ; and this is what he said to all the people 
of Judah : 

Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 
Likes a field shall Zion be ploughed, 

And Jerusalem levelled to ruins ; 
And the Temple Mount shall become 

Like a thickly wooded height. » 

19 Did Hezekiah the king or the people of Judah dream 
of putting him to death ? Rather were they not so over- 

lOI 



Jeremiah 



come by godly fear that they sued for the favour of 
Jehovah, with the result that He relented and cancelled 
His threat of catastrophe ? But look at us ! Why, we are 
on the verge of involving ourselves in a great calamity." 
24 Jeremiah, however,had (also) the support of Ahikam.i' 
the son of Shaphan, who saved him from being delivered 
to the people for execution. 

The Fate of Urijah 

20 There was another case of a man who delivered 
prophetic messages in the name of Jehovah — Uriah, 
the son of Shemaiah, who belonged to Kiriath-jearim. 
Quite in the manner of Jeremiah, he too had pronounced 

21 the doom of this city and land. His message having 
reached the ears of King Jehoiakim, with all the court 
and the military officials, the king took steps to have 
him put to death. Urijah, however, got wind of his 
purpose, and in terror he took to flight, finally reaching 

22 Egypt ; but King Jehoiakim despatched commis- 
sioners to Egypt — Elnathan the son of Achbor, and a few 

23 others — who removed him from Egypt and brought 
him back to the presence of King Jehoiakim, who 
had him slain with the sword, and his dead body flung 
into the public burying-ground. 

NO HOPE OF SPEEDY RELEASE FROM 
BABYLON (xxvii-xxix) 

The Babylonian Yoke will not be soon or easily 
Broken 

xxvii. 
I In the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah,i the son 
of Josiah, king of Judah, Jeremiah received from 
102 



Jeremiah 



2 Jehovah the message which follows. Thus spoke 
Jehovah :2 Make thongs and bars and put them on 

3 thy neck, and send a message to the kings of Edom, 
Moab, Ammon, T5n:e, and Sidon, through their am- 
bassadors who have come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah, 

4 king of Judah, and bid them say to their masters, 
" Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : 

5 Convey this message to your masters. / have made 
the earth, with man and beast on the face of it, 
by My great power and outstretched arm, and I give it 

6 to whomsoever I please. At the moment I have given 
all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, king 
of Babylon, My servant ; the beasts of the field also 
have I given him to serve him. 

7 AH' the nations shall serve him and his son and his grandson, 
till the time of his own land shall come — then many nations 
and great kings shall make him serve, 

8 The nation and the kingdom which refuses to serve 
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and to put their 
necks to the yoke of the king of Babylon — that nation, 
saith Jehovah, I will punish with sword, famine and 
pestilence, till I have delivered them into his hands. 

9 As for yourselves, do not listen to your prophets, 
diviners, dreamers, soothsayers, or sorcerers, who 
assure you that you will not be subject to the king of 

10 Babylon. It is a lie that they preach to you, and it 
will end in your removal from your own land ; for I 

11 will indeed drive you away and ye shall perish. But 
the nation that brings its neck to the yoke of the king of 
Babylon and serves him, I will leave on their own soil, 
which they shall continue to till and occupy." 

12 A similar message I gave to Zedekiah, king of Judah, 

103 



Jeremiah 



"If," said I, " you bring your neck to the yoke of the 
king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, you will 

13 be spared. Why should you and your people die by the 
sword, famine and pestilence, with which Jehovah has 
threatened the nation that refuses to serve the king of 

14 Babylon ? Do not Usten to the prophets when they tell 
you that you will not be subject to the king of Babylon : 

15 they are preaching to you a lie. I have not sent them, 
saith Jehovah : it is a he that they are preaching to you 
in My name, and it can only end in your being driven 
out and perishing — you and the prophets that preach 
to you." 

16 And* the message that I gave to the priests and to all 
this people was this : " Thus saith Jehovah : Do not 
listen to the prophets when they tell you that the vessels 
of the Temple will soon be brought back from Babylon. 

17 They are preaching to you a lie : do not hsten to them. 
Serve the king of Babylon and you will be spared : 

18 why should this city become a ruin ? But if they are 
real prophets with a real message from Jehovah, let 
them entreat Jehovah of Hosts not to allow the vessels 
that are left in the Temple and in the royal palace at 

19 Jerusalem, to be taken to Babylon. For thus saith 
Jehovah of Hosts concerning the pillars and the sea 
and the stands and the rest of the vessels that are left 

20 in this city, which were not taken by Nebuchadnezzar, 
king of Babylon, when he carried Jeconiah, the son of 
Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the nobles of Judah 

21 and Jerusalem, from Jerusalem to Babylon. Yes, 
thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel, con- 
cerning the vessels that are left in the Temple and in 

22 the royal palace and at Jerusalem ; To Babylon 

104 



J 



eremi 



iah 



they shall be brought, and there they shall remain till 
the day that I visit them, saith Jehovah ; then I will 
bring them up and restore them to this place." 

The Clash between the False Prophet and the True 

xxviii. 

1 The same year, at the beginning of the reign of 
Zedekiah, king of Judah, in the fifth month of the fourth 
year,i Hananiah the son of Azzur, the prophet, who 
belonged to Gibeon, addressed me as follows in the 
Temple in the presence of the priests and of all the 

2 people. " Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of 
Israel : ' I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. 

3 Within two years' time I will bring back to this place all 
the Temple vessels that Nebuchadnezzar, king of 
Babylon took from this place and carried to Babylon ; 

4 and Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and 
all the exiles of Judah that have gone to Babylon, I 
will bring back to this place, saith Jehovah ; for I will 
break the yoke of the king of Babylon.' " 

5 Then Jeremiah the prophet replied to Hananiah the 
prophet in the presence of the priests and of all the 
people that were standing in the Temple ; and Jeremiah 

6 the prophet said, " Amen ! Jehovah do so ! May 
Jehovah fulfil your prophecy and bring back the Temple 
vessels and all the exiles from Babylon to this place ! 

7 I ask you, however to listen to this word that I am 
about to speak in your hearing and in the hearing of all 

8 the people. From the beginning the prophets who pre- 
ceded you and me in their messages concerning many 

9 lands and mighty kingdoms, prophesied war. If a 
prophet prophesies peace, it is only when his word has 

105 



Jeremiah 



been fulfilled that you can be sure that he has had a real 

10 commission from Jehovah." Then Hananiah took the 

11 bar off Jeremiah's neck, broke it, and declared in the 
presence of all the people, " Thus saith Jehovah : 
' Within two years' time, I will similarly break the 
yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, off the 
necks of all the nations.' " Then Jeremiah the prophet 
went away. 

12 But after Hananiah had broken the bar off Jeremiah's 
neck, there came to Jeremiah this message from 

13 Jehovah : "Go and say to Hananiah, Thus saith 
Jehovah, The wooden bar you have indeed broken, but 

14 I* will replace it with a bar of iron. For thus saith 
Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : The yoke that I 
will put on the necks of all these nations will be made 
of iron — a yoke of service to Nebuchadnezzar, king of 
Babylon : for serve him they shall. I have also given 

15 him the beasts of the field." Then Jeremiah said to 
Hananiah, " Listen, Hananiah. You have no com- 

16 mission from Jehovah : you are making this people 
trust a lie. Therefore thus saith Jehovah : ' Mark this 
well : I will dismiss thee from the face of the earth. 
This very year thou shalt die ; for thy words are a 

17 disloyalty to Jehovah.' " And that very year, in the 
seventh month, the prophet Hananiah died. 

Jeremiah Exhorts the Exiles to settle down in 
Babylon 

XXIX.  

I The following is a copy of the letter sent from 

Jerusalem by Jeremiah the prophet to thei elders, the 

priests, the prophets, and all the people, who had been 

carried from Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar to exile in 

106 



Jeremiah 



2 Babylon — after the surrender2 of Jeconiah the king, 
and the queen-mother, and the eunuchs, and the princes 
of Judah and Jerusalem, and the craftsmen and smiths — 

3 the letter being sent by the hands of Eleasah the son of 
Shaphan and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, who had 
been despatched to Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar, king of 
Babylon, by Zedekiah, king of Judah : 

4 " Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel, to 
all the exiles whom I have carried from Jerusalem to 

5 Babylon : Build houses and settle ; plant gardens 
and eat the fruit of them ; take wives and rear families ; 

6 take wives also for your sons and give your daughters 
to husbands, that they may have sons and daughters ; 
increase your numbers and do not let them diminish. 

7 And strive for the welfare of the country* to which I 
have brought you as exiles. Pray for it to Jehovah ; 
for your own welfare and hers are bound up together. 

8 For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : 
Do not let yourselves be beguiled by the prophets and 
diviners in your midst, and do not Hsten to the dreams 

9 they dream ; for it is a lie that they preach to you in 
My name — they have no commission from Me, saith 
Jehovah. 

10 For thus saith Jehovah : As soon as Babylon's 
seventy years are accomplished,  I will visit you and 
bring you back to this place, in fulfilment of the gracious 

11 promise I made you. For I know the thoughts I cherish 
towards you — thoughts of weal and not of woe — to 

12 bestow upon you a future and a hope. When you 
call, I will answer you*5, and I will listen to your 

13 prayer. If ye seek Me ye shall find Me. If ye seek 

14 Me with all your heart, I will reveal Myself to you, 

107 



Jeremiah 



saith Jehovah ; and I will restore your fortunes' and gather you 
from all the nations and places to which I have driven you, 
saith Jehovah, and I will bring you back to the place from 
which I carried you into exile.' 

1 6 For' thus saith Jehovah concerning the king° who sits on 
the throne of David, and concerning all the people whose home 
is in this city — those brethren of yours who have not had to 

17 accompany you into exile. Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : See ! I 
will send the sword, the famine and the pestilence among them, 
and I will make them like figs* that are too horribly bad to eat. 

18 I will hunt them with sword, famine, and pestilence and I will 
make them an object of consternation to every kingdom in the 

world, an object of execration and horror, of scorn and insult 

19 among all the nations to which I have driven them; because, 
saith Jehovah, they refused to listen to the messages I sent them 
early and late through My servants the prophets — yes, they 

20 refused to listen, saith Jehovah. See, then, that ye listen to 
Jehovah's message, all of you exiles whom I have sent from 
Jerusalem to Babylon. 

15 But Jehovah, you say, has raised up for you prophets 

21 in Babylon. Well, thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the 
God of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah and 
Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, who preach to you a lie 
in My name. Mark this : I will deliver them into the 
hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and he 

22 will slay them before your eyes ; and their fate shall be 
adopted by all the exiles of Judah in Babylon as a 
model for imprecation. " Jehovah make thee," they 
will say, " like Zedekiah and Ahab, whom the king of 

23 Babylon roasted in the fire," because they wrought 
impious folly in Israel, in committing adultery with 
their neighbours' wives and delivering in My name 
lying messages which I never gave them. Well I 
know it, saith Jehovah, and I am witness." 

24 Touching the message of Jehovah of Hosts, the 
God of Israel, to be delivered by Jeremiah concerning 

25 Shemaiah of Nehelam. This is the man who sent a 
letter in his own name to Zephaniah, the son of 

26 Maaseiah the priest. " Jehovah," he wrote, " has 
made you priest in the place of Jehoiada the priest, i 
to exercise an oversight in the Temple over all that play 
the mad prophet and the ecstatic, and to put all such 

27 in the stocks and in the iron collar. Why then did you 
not rebuke Jeremiah of Anathoth, who has been playing 

28 the mad prophet among you ? For he has sent a 
message to us in Babylon, maintaining that the exile 
would be long, and urging us to build houses and settle, 
and to plant gardens and eat the fruit of them." 

29 Now Zephaniah the priest read the letter in the hearing 
of Jeremiah the prophet. 

30 Then there came to Jeremiah this message from 

31 Jehovah : Send to all the exiles and say. Thus saith 
Jehovah concerning Shemaiah of Nehelam : Shemaiah 
has been prophesying to you without any commission 

32 from Me and has made you trust in a lie. For this 
reason, therefore — thus saith Jehovah — I will punish 
Shemaiah of Nehelam and his descendants : not a 
man shall he have among you who will ever see the good 
fortune I will bring you,i6 saith Jehovah : for his words 
are a disloyalty to Jehovah. 

THE GLORIOUS FUTURE (xxx.-xxxiii.) 
The Restoration of Israel and Judah 

Promise of Deliverance in the Day of Distress 

1 The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah : 

2 Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel : Write all the 

3 words I have spoken to thee in a book. For mark ! 
the days are coming, saith Jehovah, when I will restore 
the fortunes of My people Israel and Judah, and re- 
establish them in possession of the land I gave their 
forefathers. 

4 Now these are the words Jehovah hath spoken 

5 concerning Israel and Judah. Yea, thus saith Jehovah 

We have heard a cry of terror, 
Of horror and dispeace. 

6 Ask ye now and see 

If a man doth travail with child. 
What meaneth then this sight — 

Every man with his hands on his loins ? 
And what mean all these faces 

Turned to a deathly pallor ? 

7 Alas ! for great is this day, 

No day is Uke unto it ; 
A time of distress for Jacob — 
Yet out of it he shall be saved. 

8 On that day, saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

I will break the yoke from their necks ; 
I will snap their bonds asunder. 
And strangers no more shall they serve. 

9 But Jehovah their God they shall serve. 

And David also, their king. 
Whom I will raise up unto them. 

10 So fear thou not, O Jacob My servant, 

O Israel, be not dismayed, saith Jehovah. 
For see ! I will save both thee and thine offspring 
From the far distant land where captive ye lie. 
no 



Jeremiah 



And Jacob once more shall have quiet and ease 
In his own land, with no one to make him afraid ; 

11 For I, saith Jehovah, am with thee to save thee. 
An end I will make of the nations — 

Of each, among whom I have scattered thee ; 
But of thee I will not make an end. 

I will not leave thee wholly unpunished. 
But in measure I will chastise thee. 

Promise of Healing 

12 For thus saith Jehovah : 

Thou art wounded past all healing, 
And smitten very sore. 

13 There is no one to plead thy cause ; 

No healing for thy wound. 
Thy scars remain unclosed. 

14 Thy lovers have all forgotten thee, 

They care for thee no more. 
I have struok thee as foemen strike. 
With chastisement unpitying, 
Because of thy manifold guilt 
And thy sins that are grown so mighty. 

15 Why criest thou over thy wound, 

That thy pain is past all healing ? 
'Tis because of thy manifold guilt 

And thy sins that are grown so mighty, 
I have done these things unto thee. 

16 Devoured shall be therefore all those that devour thee, 

Thine enemies all shall go into captivity ; 
Those that despoil thee themselves shall be spoiled. 
And thy plunderers I will consign to be plundered. 
Ill 



Jeremiah 



17 I will cause new flesh to grow over thy wound, 

I will heal thy scars, saith Jehovah ; 
For men have called thee an outcast, 
" Our quarry "1 — for whom none careth. 

The Happy City, with her Native Prince 

18 Thus saith Jehovah : 

The tents that were Jacob's I yet will restore. 

On the sites that were his I will show My compassion ; 

On her own proper mound shall the city be built, 
And the palace shall stand on its rightful site. 

19 And out of them songs of praise shall float, 

And the voices of them that make merry ; 
I will add to their numbers till many they be, 
I will crown them with glory, and they shall be 
honoured. 

20 Their children shall be as in days of old. 

And their sacred assembly safe under My care ; 
I will punish all those that oppress them. 

21 Their prince shall be one of themselves, 

And their ruler shall come from among them. 
I will let him draw nigh and approach Me ; 
For where is the man, saith Jehovah, 
That else had the courage to face Me ? 

22 And ye shall be My people, 

And I will be your God. 

Judgment shall Break upon the Wicked 

23 Hark ! 'tis Jehovah's tempest. 

It goeth forth with fury — 
112 



Jeremiah 



A whirling tempest that whirleth 

Full straight for the heads of the wicked. 
24 The glowing wrath of Jehovah 
Shall not be backward turned. 
Until He have fully accomplished 
The purposes of His heart. 

At the end of the days ye shall know what this 
meaneth. 



Israel's Happy Return from Exile 
xxxi. 

1 At that time, saith Jehovah, 

I will be God indeed 
Unto all the families of Israel, 
And they shall be My people. 

2 Thus saith Jehovah : 

The people escaped from the sword 

Shall most surely find grace in the wilderness. 1 
When Israel seeketh for rest, 

3 From afar2 will Jehovah appear to him. 
I have loved thee with love everlasting. 

And so I with kindness have drawn thee. 

4 Once more, O Virgin of Israel, 

I will build thee up securely : 
Once more shalt thou deck thee with timbrels. 
And step in the merry dance ; 

5 Once more on the hiUs of Samaria 

Shall vineyards be planted by thee, 

And the planters shall eat what they planted. 

6 For a day shall come when the watchers 

On Ephraim's highlands shaU cry, 

113 



Jeremiah 



" Arise, let us pilgrim to Zion, 
Where dwelleth Jehovah our God." 

7 For thus saith Jehovah to Jacob,  

Ring out a cry of joy ; 
Shout on the top of the mountains,* 
Publish, and praise, and say, 
" Jehovah hath saved His people. 
The remnant of Israel." 

8 Behold, from the north land I bring them. 

And out of earth's uttennost parts I will gather them — 
Among them the blind and the lame. 

And the women with child, with those soon to be 

mothers ; 
Hither again they shall come — a great company. 

9 Forth they went with tears. 

But their homeward way I will comfort ;5 
I will lead them to streams of water. 

On a level way without stumbling ; 
For I am a Father to Israel, 

And Ephraim is My first-born. 

10 Hear, O ye nations, the word of Jehovah, 

Declare it to far distant islands and say, 
" He that scattered Israel shall gather him, 
And keep him as shepherd his flock." 

11 For Jehovah hath ransomed Jacob, 

And redeemed him from hands that were stronger 
than his. 

12 They shall come, they shall sing on the heights of Zion, 

All radiant with joy at the gifts of Jehovah — 
114 



Jeremiah 



The corn and the wine and the oil, 

And the young of the flock and the herd ; 

Their soul like a well-watered garden shall be, 
And they shall pine no more. 

13 Then the maids shall rejoice in the dance, 

And the young and the old shall be merry ; 
I will turn their mourning to joy, 

I will comfort and gladden them after their sorrow. 

14 The priests I will satisfy richly. 

My folk shall be filled with My bounty. 

Mother RacheVs Sorrow for her Exiled Children 

15 Hark ! there echoes through Ramah,7 

Lament and bitter weeping : 
'Tis Rachel bewaihng her children. 
And refusing to be comforted. 
Because they are no more. 

16 Thus saith Jehovah : 
Restrain thy voice from weeping. 

And keep thine eyes from tears ; 
For thy work shall have its reward, 

From the land of the foe shall thy children return. 

17 There is hope for thy coming days. 

Thy children shall return. 

Israel's Penitence, Return and Welcome Home 

18 Truly I heard the voice 

Of Ephraim thus lamenting, 
" Thou hast chastened me, and I was chastened ; 
Like a calf unbroken was L 

115 



Jeremiah 



Bring me back, and let me return, 
For Thou art Jehovah my God. 

19 Mine exile hath led me to penitence ; 

Chastened, I smote on my breast. 
Put to shame and confusion am I, 

For I bear the reproach of my youth." 

20 Is not Ephraim my dear, dear son ? 

Is he not a darUng child ? 
For let Me but utter his name, 

And My mind keeps resting upon him. 
So My heart for him doth yearn, 

And pity him I must. 

21 Set way-marks, and make thee guide-posts ; 
Bethink thee of the highway, .* 

The road by which thou didst travel. 
Return, O Virgin of Israel, 
Return to these thy cities. 

22 How long, O backsliding daughter. 

Wilt thou remain irresolute ? 
For on earth hath Jehovah created a new thing, 
A woman shall into a man be transformed. 9 

The Restoration of Judah 

23 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 

Once more shall this speech be used 
In the land and the cities of Judah, 
When I have restored their fortunes : 
" Jehovah grant thee His blessing. 

Thou sacred Mountain, where righteousness 
dwelleth." 

116 



Jeremiah 



24 Yea, Judah shall dwell therein, 

And all her cities together — 
The men that plough the land, 

And the shepherds that wander with flocks. 

25 For the weary soul I refresh. 

And each soul that doth pine I replenish. 

26 Thereupon I awoke and gazed, 

For my sleepi' had been sweet unto me. 

27 Behold, saith Jehovah, the days are coming, 

When I will sow the households of Israel and Judah 
With the seed of men" and the seed of cattle. 

28 And as once I was wakeful to pluck them up, 

To break down, to afflict, overthrow and destroy 
them, 
So now I will watch over them (once more. 

But this time) to build up and to plant,saith Jehovah. 

29 In those days men shaU say no more, 
" The fathers have eaten sour grapes, 

And the children's teeth are on edge ; " 

30 But each for his own sin shall die. 
And the man that hath eaten sour grapes 

Shall find his own teeth set on edge. 

The New Covenant 

31 Behold the days are coming, 

When I, saith Jehovah, wiU make a new covenant 
With the households of Israel and Judah — 

32 But unlike the covenant I made with their fathers. 

The day, when I took their hand in Mine, 
To bring them out of the land of Egypt — 
117 



Jeremiah 



The covenant they themselves did break, 

So that I, on My part, was constrained to abhor 
them.i2 
33 But this, saith Jehovah, is the covenant I will make 
With the household of Israel after those days : 
I will set My law in their bosom. 
And write it upon their heart, 
And I will be their God, 
And they shall be My people. 

24 No more need any teach 

His fellow to know Jehovah ; 
For one and all shall know Me, 

The small and the great alike ; 
For I will pardon their guilt. 

And their sin will remember no more. 

Perpetuity of Israel 

35 Thus declareth Jehovah, 

Who giveth the sun for a light by day, 
'' The moon and the stars for a Hght by night. 

Who stirreth the sea that the waves thereof roar — 
Jehovah of Hosts is His name : 

36 Not until those fixed orbs shall vanish 

Clean out of My sight, saith Jehovah, 
Shall Israel's race cease to be 
A nation before Me for ever. 

37 Not till the heavens above can be measured. 

And earth's foundations be searched out beneath. 
Shall I ever cast off the race of Israel 
For all they have done, saith Jehovah. 
118 



Jeremiah 



Expansion of Jerusalem's Ancient Boundary 

38 Be assured, saith Jehovah, the days are coming, when 
the city shall again be built up for Jehovah from the 

39 tower of Hananeli to the gate at the comer, i* and the 
line of the wall shall pass straight oni to the hill Gareb, 

40 where it will turn round to Goah. Further, the entire 
valley (of Hinnom) with its corpses and ashes and 
the whole locality as far as the valley of Kidron up 
to the corner of the horse-gate on the east, shall be 
consecrated to Jehovah ; it shall not be plucked up or 
thrown down again for ever. 

During the Siege Jeremiah Displays his Confidence 

in the Ultimate Restoration of his People by 

Redeeming a Piece of Land Belonging 

to his Family at Anathoth 

The Purchase 
xxxii. 

1 The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah 
in the tenth yeari of Zedekiah, king of Judah, which 

2 was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar. At that 
time the forces of the king of Babylon were investing 
Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was confined to 

3 the guard-house of the royal palace, where Zedekiah the 
king had shut him up on account of his prophetic 
preaching. " What do you mean," he had demanded, 
"by an announcement of this kind : ' Thus saith 
Jehovah, Depend upon it, I will give this city into the 
hands of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it. 

4 Nor shall Zedekiah, king of Judah, escape the hands of 

119 



Jeremiah 



the Chaldeans ; he will assuredly be delivered into the 
hands of the king of Babylon. He shall speak to him 

5 face to face, and see him eye to eye ; and he shall bring 
Zedekiah to Babylon, where he will remain till I visit 
him. Though you fight with the Chaldeans you shall 
have no success.' " 

6 Now there came to Jeremiah the following message 

7 from Jehovah 2 : " Hanamel, the son of thine uncle 
Shallum, is about to pay thee a visit, to request thee to 
buy the land he holds at Anathoth ; and he will urge 
that, as thou art the next of kin, it is thy privilege and 

8 duty 3 to receive it." And so it happened : my cousin 
Hanamel paid me in the guard-house the visit Jehovah 
had intimated, and said : " I want you to buy the land 
I possess at Anathoth ; for you are the legal heir, and 
it is your duty to secure it — so buy it for yourself." 
Then I recognised that the message I had received was 

9 really from Jehovah. So I bought the land at Anathoth 
from my cousin Hanamel, and I weighed out the money 

10 to him — seventeen silver shekels.  Then I signed the 
deed and sealed it, took witnesses, and paid him the 

11 money in full. 6 I then took the purchase-deed — 
the one whichjwas sealed and the one which was open — 

12 and gave it to Baruch, the son of Neriah, the son of 
Machseiah, in the presence of my cousin Hanamel, and 
of the witnesses who had signed the purchase-deed 

13 and of all the Jews in the guard-house. In their 
presence I then gave these instructions to Baruch : 

14 " Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : 
Take these deeds — this purchase deed which is sealed 
and this deed which is open — and put them in an 
earthenware jar, so that they may be preserved for a 

120 



Jeremiah 



15 long time to come. For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 
the God of Israel : A time is coming when houses and 
fields and vineyards shall again be bought in this land." 

The Prophet's Prayer 

16 Now, after I had given the purchase-deed to Baruch, 
the son of Neriah, I prayed in these words to Jehovah : 

17 " Ah, Lord Jehovah ! Thou, by Thy mighty power and 
outstretched arm, hast made the heavens and the earth, 

18 and nothing is too hard for Thee. Kindness Thou 
showest to thousands, and retribution for the guilt of 
the fathers thou bringest home to their children after 

19 them, Thou great and mighty God, great in purpose and 
mighty in action, whose eyes are open to all the ways of 
men, giving to each his deserts and the fruit of his deeds. 

20 In the land of Egypt Thou didst set in Israel and 
among (other) men signs and wonders (which are 
commemorated) unto this day, and so didst win for 

21 Thyself the renown that is Thine to-day ; and Thou 
didst bring Thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt 
by signs and wonders, with mighty hand and out- 

22 stretched arm and terrors great ; and Thou gavest them 
this land which Thou didst swear to their fathers to 
give them — a land flowing with milk and honey — and 

23 they came in and took possession of it. But they would 
not listen to Thy voice, nor live in accordance with Thy 
law : they have left undone all that Thou didst com- 
mand them to do ; and so Thou hast brought all this 
misery upon them. 

24 Behold how the siege-mounds for storming the city 
are already close upon it, and under the stress of 
sword, famine and pestilence, the city is already as good 

131 



Jeremiah 



as given into the hands of the Chaldeans that are assail- 
ing it. What Thou hast threatened has come, as 

25 Thou Thyself seest. And it was Thou Thyself, O 
Lord Jehovah, who didst command me to buy the land ; 
(and this I have done), writing and sealing the deedo 
and calling witnesses, though all the while the city is 
already as good as delivered into the hands of the 
Chaldeans." 

The Divine Answer : First, Judgment for Sin 

26 Then there came to Jeremiah the following message 

27 from Jehovah : I am Jehovah, the God of all flesh : is 

28 there anything too hard for Me ? Therefore thus saith 
Jehovah : Behold ! I am about to deUver this city into 
the hands of the Chaldeans and of Nebuchadrezzar, 

29 king of Babylon, and he shall take it. Yes, the 
Chaldeans that are assaiUng this city shall come and set 
this city on fire and burn it, with the houses on whose 
roofs they have provoked Me by burning sacrifice to 
the Baal and by offering drink-offerings to other 

30 gods ; for, ever since their youth the people of Israel 
and Judah have done nothing but evil in My sight. 11 

31 From the day it was built up to this day, this city has 
provoked Me to remove it, in wrath and fury, out of 

32 My sight, for all the evil that the people of Israel and 
Judah have wrought to vex Me — themselves, with their 
kings, princes, priests and prophets, with the men of 

33 Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem. They have 
turned their backs to Me instead of their faces ; and 
though I taught them early and late, they would never 

34 hsten or accept correction. The very House that 
bears My name they have defiled by introducing 

122 



Jeremiah 



35 into it their abominable worship. They have built 
Baal sanctuaries in the Valley of the son of Hinnom 
for the (fiery) consecration of their sons and daughters 
to Molech, though this was no commandment of 
Mine — it never entered into My mind that they should 
do this abomination, and thus involve Judah in sin. 

Thereafter, Promise of Restoration 

36 Now, therefore, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, 
concerning the city of which ye say that hunger, 
famine and pestilence have already as good as deUvered 

37 it into the hands of the king of Babylon : See ! I will 
gather them out of all the lands to which, in My great 
wrath, anger, and fury, I have driven them, for I will 
bring them back to this place and settle them here 

38 securely ; and they shall be My people, and I will be 

39 their God. A single heart I will give them, and a single 
way (will I set before them), that they may hold Me 
in reverence for ever, and that they and their children 

40 after them may prosper ; and I will make with them 
an everlasting covenant to follow them ceaselessly 
with My blessing, and I will put the fear of Me in their 
hearts, that they may follow Me without swerving. 

41 It will also be a joy to Me to do them good ; and 
faithfully, with all My heart and soul, I will plant them in 
this land. 

42 For thus saith Jehovah, As surely as I have brought 
upon this people all this mass of misery, so surely will I 
bring upon them all the blessings I promise them. 

43 In this land that ye call a desolation, forsaken of man 
and beast and delivered into the hands of the Chal- 

44 deans, fields shall be bought once more. Yes, men 

123 



Jeremiah 



shall buy fields for money, subscribing and sealing the 
deeds, and taking witnesses, in the district of Benjamin 
and the neighbourhood of Jerusalem and the cities of 
Judah, in the cities of the hill country, the lowland, 
and the south.  For I will restore their fortunes, saith 
Jehovah. 

Renewed Promises of Restoration 

Jerusalem and Judah will he Pardoned, Restored, 

Made Glad and Renowned 
xxxm. 

1 A second message from Jehovah came to Jeremiah 

2 while he was still confined in the guard-house. It 
was this : Thus saith Jehovah, who created the earth 
and formed it to stand fast — Jehovah is His name : 

3 " Call to Me, and in answer I will tell thee great and 
hidden things, of which thou art unaware." 

4 Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, concerning 
the houses of this city and the royal palaces of Judah 
which have been demolished to make a defence against 

5 the siege-mounds and the sword. The Chaldeans are 
coming to fight and to fill them with the dead bodies 
of the men whom I have slain in Mine anger and fury, 
and whose manifold wickedness has constrained Me 

6 to hide My face from them. Nevertheless, I will close 
up the city's wounds and heal her completely, and I 
will unveil to them treasures of peace and stability.'* 

7 The fortunes of Judah and Israel I will restore ; and I 

8 will build them up as of old. I will cleanse them of all 
the guilt of their sin against Me, and I will forgive all 

9 the guilt of their sin and rebellion against Me. And 
she shall be to Me a source of dehght, of praise, and of 
glory among all the nations of the earth, when they hear 

124 



Jeremiah 



of all the happiness that I shall achieve for them ; and 
they shall fear and tremble at all the happiness and all 
the prosperity that I shall provide for them. 

10 Thus saith Jehovah : In this place that you call a 
desolation, forsaken of man and beast, in the cities of 
Judah and on the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, 

11 forsaken of man and beast, there shall once again be 
heard the voice of mirth and gladness, the voice of 
bridegroom and bride, the voice of those that say, as they 
bring their thank-offerings into the House of Jehovah, 

Give thanks to Jehovah of Hosts, 
For Jehovah is gracious. 
His kindness endureth for ever. 
For I will restore the fortunes of the land, saith 

12 Jehovah, as in the olden time. Thus saith Jehovah of 
Hosts : In this place which is desolate, forsaken of 
man and beast, and in all the cities thereof, there shall 
again be homesteads of shepherds with flocks reclining. 

13 In the cities of the hill country, the lowland, and the 
south, in the district of Benjamin, the neighbourhood of 
Jerussdem, and the cities of Judah,  flocks shall once 
more file past, to be counted under the hands (of the 
shepherds), saith Jehovah. 

Promise of the Ideal King or Messiah 

14 Mark this,' saith Jehovah ; the days are coming when I will 
perform My gracious promise to the households of Israel and 

15 Judah. In those days and at that time 

I will raise up for David a rightepus shoot, 

Who shall execute justice and right in the land. 

16 In those days shall Judah be crowned with salvation, 

And Jerusalem in safety shall dwell : 
And this is the name men shall call her, 
*' Our champion is Jehovah." 

125 



Jeremiah 



Promise of the Perpetuity of the Davidic Dynasty and 
the Levitical Priesthood 

17 For thus saith Jehovah : David shall never want a man to sit 

18 upon the throne of the house of Israel ; neither shall the 
Levitical priests ever, for all time to come, want a man to 
offer burnt-offerings in My presence or to burn oblations or to 
do sacrifice. 

19 Further, there came to Jeremiah this message from Jehovah, 

20 Thus saith Jehovah : Not until ye can annul My covenant with 
Day and Night, so that Day and Night shall come no more at 

21 their appointed time — not until then shall My covenant be 
annulled with David My servant, that a son of his should reign 
upon his throne ; or My covenant with the Levitical priests, 

22 My ministers. Numberless as the host of heaven, measureless 
as the sand of the sea, shall I multiply the descendants of 
David, My servant, and the Levitical priests. My ministers. 

23 Jeremiah received this further message from Jehovah : Hast 

24 thou observed what this people has been saying ? They have 
said that Jehovah has cast oli the two families of His choice, 
and in contempt for His people has ordained that they shall no 

25 longer exist as a nation before Him ?® Well, thus saith 
Jehovah : As surely as I have created Day and Night and 

26 determined the order of heaven and earth, so surely will I never 
cast off the descendants of Jacob and of David My servant, 
or fail to select his descendants as rulers over the race of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob ; for I will have compassion upon 
them and restore their fortunes. 



Incidents of the Siege of Jerusalem 

Jeremiah Warns Zedekiah of the Folly of Resisting Babylon 
xxxiv. 
I This message came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when 
Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and all his army, 
and all the kingdoms and nations of the earth that 
were under his dominion were fighting against 
126 



Jeremiah 



2 Jerusalem and all the cities of Judah :i Thus ssdth 
Jehovah, the God of Israel, Go to Zedekiah, king of 
Judah, and say to him. Thus saith Jehovah : I am 
about to deUver this city into the hands of the king of 

3 Babylon, who will burn it with fire. As for thee, thou 
shalt not escape out of his hands : thou wilt assuredly 
be seized and into his hands dehvered : thou shalt see 
the king of Babylon eye to eye, and speak to him face 

4 to face, and to Babylon thou shalt go. But listen, 
Zedekiah, king of Judah, to the message of Jehovah : 
Thus saith Jehovah concerning thee : Thou shalt not 

5 die by the sword, but thou shalt die in peace. (Sweet 
spices) shall be burned for thee, as for thine ancestors 
before thee, and lamentations shall be made for thee 
with " Ah ! Lord," 2 for I, saith Jehovah, have spoken 
the word. 

6 Then Jeremiah the prophet delivered this message to 

7 Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem, when the army 
of the king of Babylon was fighting against Jerusalem, 
and all the cities of Judah that were left, and Lachish 
and Azekah — the only cities of Judah that remained as 
fortified cities. 

Dishonest Attitude of the Jews to the Liberation of their 

Slaves : To be Punished by the Liberation of Disaster 

upon Themselves 

8 The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, 
after King Zedekiah had covenanted with all the people 

9 in Jerusalem to make a proclamation of liberty — each 
man to set free his Hebrew slave, whether male or 
female, so that no one of Jewish descent should serve 

10 as slave any longer. Now all the princes and all the 

127 



Jeremiah 



people kept the covenant they had entered into to 
liberate their several male and female slaves and to 
treat them as slaves no longer : they kept it and set 

11 them free. Afterwards, however, they turned and 
forced back into slavery the male and female slaves 
whom they had Uberated. 

12 Then there came to Jeremiah this message from 

13 Jehovah, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel : 
When I brought your forefathers out of the land of 
Egypt, that house of slavery, I Myself made this 

14 covenant that at the end of six years they were to 
release any Hebrew brother who had sold himself to 
them — after six years of service, they were to set him 
free : your forefathers, however, would not listen 

15 or incUne their ear to Me. But you have in these days 
acted in a very different spirit ; you have done what 
I desired in each proclaiming liberty to his (enslaved) 
neighbour ; in My presence you made a covenant 

16 in the House that is called by My name. Now, 
however, you have turned round and dishonoured My 
name by forcing back again into slavery the several 
male and female slaves you had set free to dispose of 
themselves as they would. 

17 Therefore thus saith Jehovah : You have disobeyed 
My injunction to make a proclamation of Uberty, each of 
you to his (enslaved) neighbour. Well, then, saith 
Jehovah : You shall have your proclamation of Uberty 
from Me — (Uberty) to the sword, pestilence and 
famine — and I wiU make you an object of consternation 

18 to every kingdom in the world. As for the men 
that broke the covenant they had made in My presence, 
when they passed between the pieces of the calf they 

128 



J 



ah 



eremi 

19 had cut in two — I mean the princes of Judah and 
Jerusalem, the eunuchs, the priests and all the people of 
the land who passed between the pieces of the calf 

20 they had cut in two — I will deliver them into the hands 
of their enemies and of those that seek their life, and 
their dead bodies shall be devoured by the birds of the 

21 air and the beasts of the earth. Further, Zedekiah, 
king of Judah, and his princes, I will deUver into the 
hands of their enemies and of those that seek their hfe, 
and into the hands of the army of the king of Babylon 
which (for the moment) has raised the siege and left you. 

22 Mark this well, saith Jehovah, I will issue My word of 
commmand and bring them back to this city ; they 
shall assault it and take it and burn it with fire, and the 
cities of Judah I will turn into an uninhabited deso- 
lation. 

The Fidelity of the Rechabites contrasted with the 
Disobedience of the Jews 

XXXV. 

1 In the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of 
Judah, Jeremiah received the following message from 

2 Jehovah : Go to the clan of the Rechabites, talk with 
them,i bring them into one of the chambers (of the 

3 Temple) and offer them wine to drink. So I took 
Jaazaniah, the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaz- 
ziniah, with his brothers and all his sons and the whole 

4 Rechabite clan, and brought them into the Temple 
chamber belonging to the sons of Hanan, the son of 
Yigdaliah,2 the man of God, that was adjacent to the 
chamber of the princes, above the chamber of 
Maaseiah, the son of Shallum, the Keeper of the 

129 



Jeremiah 



5 Threshold. I then set before the Rechabites bowls 

6 full of wine and cups and told them to drink. " No," 
they said, " we will drink no wine ; for Jonadab, the 
son of Rechab, our ancestor, laid a charge upon us and 

7 our children to drink no wine, to build no houses, to sow 
no seed, to plant and possess no vineyard for ever, but to 
spend all our days in tents, so that we might Uve long on 

8 the land where as strangers we dwell. In full obedience, 
therefore, to this charge of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, 
our ancestor, we have drunk no wine all our life long, 
neither we, nor our wives, nor our sons, nor our 

9 daughters. We have built no houses to live in, we 

10 have owned neither vineyard, field, nor seed, but 
we have lived in tents and faithfully fulfilled all the 

11 instructions of our ancestor Jonadab. It was only 
when the land was invaded by Nebuchadrezzar, king 
of Babylon, that we decided to come to Jerusalem, to 
escape the Babylonian and Aramean* armies ; that is 
why we are (now) living in Jerusalem." 

12 Then there came to Jeremiah this message from 

13 Jehovah : " Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel : 
Go and say to the men of Judah and the citizens of 
Jerusalem : Should this not be a lesson to you to obey 

14 My words, saith Jehovah ? The injunction that 
Jonadab the son of Rechab laid upon his sons to 
drink no wine has been steadily observed : in obedience 
to that ancestral charge they have abstained to this day. 
But when I spoke to you early and late, you refused 

15 to listen. Early and late I sent you all My servants the 
prophets with the message to each man of you that, if 
you would abandon your wicked ways, amend your 
conduct, and no longer indulge in the service of other 

130 



Jeremiah 



gods, you should continue in the land that I gave your 
forefathers ; but you would not incline your ear or 
i6 Hsten to Me. UnUke the descendants of Jonadab the 
son of Rechab, who have steadily observed the in- 
junctions of their ancestor, this people has refused to 

17 listen to Me. Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 
the God of Israel : See ! I am about to bring upon 
Judah and upon all the citizens of Jerusalem all the 
misery with which I have threatened them, because 
they refused to Usten to My words or respond to My 

18 call." But to the clan of the Rechabites Jeremiah said, 
" Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : 
Because you have obeyed the injunction of your 
ancestor Jonadab, keeping all his commandments and 

19 fulfiling all his instructions, Jonadab, the son of Rechab 
shall never want a man to minister to Me, while the 
earth stands. s 



Jeremiah's Prophecies Committed to Writing, 

Publicly Read in the Temple, and Contemptuously 

Burned by King Jehoiakim 
XXX vi. 

1 In the fourth year of Jehoiakim, 1 the son of Josiah, 
king of Judah, Jeremiah received the following message 

2 from Jehovah : Take a book-roll, and write on it aU 
the messages I have communicated to thee with regard 
to Israel and Judah and all nations, from My first 
message to thee in the days of Josiah right on to the 

3 present day. 2 It may be that, when the people of 
Judah hear of all the misery I am planning to bring 
upon them, they will severally abandon their wicked 

131 



Jeremiah 



ways, and receive at My hands pardon for their guilt 
and sin. 

4 Then Jeremiah summoned Baruch, the son of Neriah, 
who wrote down on a book-roll to Jeremiah's die* 
tation all the messages Jehovah had communicated to 

5 him. Thereafter Jeremiah gave instructions to 
Baruch in the following terms : " Seeing that I am 
personally under restraint and debarred from access 

6 to the Temple, do you go and, on the day appointed 
for fasting,* read aloud in the Temple the messages of 
Jehovah in the hearing of the people from the roll 
which you have written to my dictation ; read them 
also in the hearing of the Judeans who come from their 

7 respective country towns. It may be that they will 
humbly supplicate Jehovah, and severally abandon 
their wicked ways : for great is the anger and fury 

8 with which Jehovah has threatened this people." In 
accordance, therefore with his instructions from 
Jeremiah the prophet, Baruch read aloud from the 
book the words of Jehovah in the Temple.  

9 Now in the ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakim 
the son of Josiah, king of Judah, a sacred fast was 
proclaimed by all the people resident in Jerusalem, 
and aU those also present from the country towns of 

10 Judah. Then in the hearing of all the people Baruch 
read from the book the messages of Jeremiah from the 
room that belonged to Gemariah, the son o f Shaphan 
the Secretary of State, which was situated in the upper 

11 court at the entrance to the new Temple gate. Now 
when Micaiah, the son of Gemariah, the son of 
Shaphan, had heard the messages of Jehovah as they 

12 were read from the book, he went down to the palace 

132 



Jeremiah 



to the room of the Secretary of State, and there he found 
the whole court seated — Elishama, the Secretary and 
Delaiah, the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan, the 
son of Achbor, and Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, and 
Zedekiah, the son of Hananiah, and indeed the whole 

13 court. Micaiah proceeded to inform them of all the 
words he had heard Baruch read out of the book in the 

14 hearing of the people. The whole court accordingly 
despatched a messenger to Baruch, namely one Jehudi, 
the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of 
Cushi,9 with instructions to Baruch to appear, bring- 
ing with him the roll from which he had read in the 
hearing of the people. So Baruch, the son of Neriah, 
appeared before them with the roll in his hand. 

15 Then they told him to sit down and read it in their 

16 hearing ; so Baruch read while they listened. When 
they had heard it all, they turned to one another in 
consternation, exclaiming to Baruch that they were 

17 bound to inform the king of all this. They then 
asked Baruch to explain how he had written all these 

18 words.io Baruch rephed that Jeremiah had dictated 
them all to him, and he had written them down with 

19 ink in the book. " Well, then," said the princes to 
Baruch, " go into hiding, you and Jeremiah, and let 

20 nobody know where you are." After they had 
deposited the roll in the chamber of Elishama the 
Secretary, they visited the king in his apartment,ii 
and reported the whole matter to him. 

21 The king then despatched Jehudi to fetch the roll ; 
and, when he had brought it from Elishama's chamber, 
he read it in the hearing of the king and of all the 

22 courtiers who were in attendance upon him. Now 

133 



Jeremiah 



the king was sitting in the winter house,i2 and the 

23 fireis on the brazier was burning before him ; and 
every three or four columns that Jehudi read, the king 
would cut up with his penknife and fling into the fire 
that was on the brazier, till the whole roll was con- 

24 sumed in the fire that was on the brazier. But there 
was no sense of horror either on the part of the king 
or of any of his ministers as they Hstened to all these 

25 words, nor did they rend their garments. Elnathan, 
Delaiah, and Gemariah, however, had entreated the 
king not to bum the roll, but he would not listen to 

26 them. Then the king commanded the royal prince 
Jerachmeel, and Seraiah, the son of Azriel, and 
Shelemiah, the son of Abdeel, to fetch Baruch the scribe 
and Jeremiah the prophet ; but Jehovah kept them in 
concealment. 

27 After the king had burned the roll containing the 
words written by Baruch to Jeremiah's dictation, 

28 Jeremiah received this message from Jehovah, " Once 
more take another roll, and write on it all the words 
that were on the first roll that was consigned to the 

29 flames by Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and deHver this 
message to Jehoiakim, king of Judah, Thus saith 
Jehovah : Thou hast taken it upon thee to burn this 
roll, and to demand my reason for recording the threat 
that the king of Babylon would assuredly come and 

30 destroy this land, and clear it of man and beast. There- 
fore thus saith Jehovah concerning Jehoiakim, king of 
Judah : Never a man shall he have to sit upon the 
throne of David ; his dead body shall be flung out and 

31 exposed to the heat of day and the cold of night. I 
will punish him, his descendants, and his ministers, for 

134 



Jeremiah 



their sins ; and I will bring upon them and upon the 
citizens of Jerusalem all the misery with which I 
threatened them in vain." 
32 Then Jeremiah took another roll and gave it to 
Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote on it 
to Jeremiah's dictation all the words of the book that 
had been burned by Jehoiakim ; and it was supple- 
mented by many messages of a similar kind. 

EXPERIENCES OF JEREMIAH DURING 

THE SIEGE AND AT THE CAPTURE OF 

JERUSALEM (xxxvii.-xxxix) 

Jeremiah Warns King Zedekiah of the Impending 

Fate of Jerusalem 
XXX vii. 

1 Now Zedekiah the son of Josiah was reigning in place 
of Coniah,! the son of Jehoiakim, having been set upon 
the throne of Judah by Nebuchadrezzar, king of Baby- 

2 Ion ; but neither he nor his ministers nor the people 
of the land gave any heed to the messages Jehovah 

3 had delivered by the prophet Jeremiah. King 
Zedekiah, however, sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah, 
and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to 
Jeremiah, with the request that he would pray for 

4 them to Jehovah their God. Now Jeremiah, who had 
not yet been put in prison, was still coming and 
going among the people. 

5 The Chaldeans who were engaged in the siege of 
Jerusalem, having received a report that Pharaoh's 
army was advancing from Egypt, abandoned the siege. 

6 Then there came to Jeremiah this message from 

135 



Jeremiah 



7 Jehovah, Thus saith Jehovah : Tell the king of 
Judah who hath sent thee to consult Me, that 
Pharaoh's army which is advancing to your aid 

8 shall return to Egypt to their own land ; and the 
Chaldeans will come back and assault this city 

9 and take it and burn it with fire. Thus saith Jehovah : 
Do not delude yourselves with the idea that the Chal- 
deans will leave you for good : they will do nothing of 

10 the kind. For even if you defeated the whole 
Chaldean army that is fighting against you, so com- 
pletely that the only survivors were wounded men — a 
man to a tent — even they would rise up and burn this 
city with fire. 

Jeremiah Arrested and Imprisoned 

11 When, in view of the advance of Pharaoh's army, 
the Chaldean forces had abandoned the siege of 

12 Jerusalem, Jeremiah made a journey from Jerusalem 
to the district of Benjamin to receive his inheritance2 

13 among the people. He had just reached the Benjamin 
gate when he was apprehended there by a sentry 
named Jirijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of 
Hananiah, who called out, " You are deserting to the 

14 Chaldeans." " It is false," said Jeremiah, " I am 
not deserting to the Chaldeans." But Jirijah, refusing 
to listen, apprehended Jeremiah and brought him 

15 before the courtiers, who in their exasperation had 
Jeremiah flogged and put in the house of Jonathan, 
the Secretary of State, which they had turned into a 

16 prison. So Jeremiah found himself in the cells of the 
dungeon, where he remained for a considerable time. 

136 



Jeremiah 



Amelioration of Jeremiah's Lot 

17 Then King Zedekiah sent for him and questioned 
him secretly in his house whether there was any com- 
munication from Jehovah. " There is," said Jeremiah ; 
" you will be delivered into the hands of the king of 

18 Babylon. Further," said Jeremiah to the king, 
" what is my crime against you or your ministers or 

19 this people that you have put me in prison ? Where 
are your prophets (now) that assured you that the king 

20 of Babylon would never invade this country ? And 
now I beseech your Majesty to listen with favour to my 
supplication, and not to allow me to be taken back 
to the house of Jonathan the Secretary, where I am 

21 likely to perish." Jeremiah was accordingly committed 
by royal command to the guard-court, and furnished 
with a loaf of bread a day from the Bakers' Street, till 
all the bread in the city was consumed. So Jeremiah 
remained in the guard-court. 

Jeremiah Accused of Treason, is Put into a Dungeon, 

from which he is Rescued by Ebedmelech, a 

Foreigner 
xxxviii. 

1 NowShephatiah, the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah, the 
son of Pashhur, and Juca,i the son of Shelemiah, and 
Pashhur, the son of Malchiah, had heard Jeremiah 

2 addressing all the people in words like these : " Thus 
saith Jehovah : Whoever remains in this city shall die 
by sword, famine and pestilence ; but whoever goes 
over to the Chaldeans shall be spared, though he shall 

3 escape with nothing but his life." Also, " Thus saith 

137 



Jeremiah 



Jehovah, This city shall most assuredly be dehvered 
into the hands of the king of Babylon's army, and 

4 it shall be captured." Whereupon those courtiers 

said to the king, " We petition you to have this fellow 
put to death : this sort of talk is unnerving all the 
people and the soldiers left in the city. This fellow 

5 does not want to help the city, but to ruin it." " He 
is in your power," said the king ; for he was helpless 

6 against them. 2 So they took Jeremiah and, lowering 
him with ropes, they threw him into the cistern of the 
royal prince Malchiah, that was in the guard-court. 
There was no water in the cistern, but only mud ; 
and Jeremiah sank in the mud. 

7 Now it came to the ears of Ebedmelech, an Ethiopian 
eunuch attached to the palace, that they had put 

8 Jeremiah in the cistern. Ebedmelech accordingly left 
the palace for the Benjamin gate where the king 
happened to be sitting at the time, and thus he 

9 addressed him : " Your Majesty, these men have 
behaved most wrongfully in their treatment of Jeremiah 
the prophet ; they have flung him into the cistern and 
he will die of hunger on the spot, for there is no more 

10 bread in the city." At once the king ordered 
Ebedmelech to take with him three men and pull 
Jeremiah out of the cistern before he perished. 

11 Ebedmelech, accordingly, taking the men with him, 
went to the palace, and secured from (a lumber room) 
underneath the treasury some torn and tattered rags, 
and let them down by ropes to Jeremiah into the 

12 cistern. Then he told Jeremiah to put the torn and 
tattered rags under his armpits beneath the ropes ; 

13 and Jeremiah did so. Then they drew him up with the 

138 



Jeremiah 



ropes and pulled him out of the cistern ; and Jeremiah 
remained in the guard-court. 

Zedekiah Secretly Consults Jeremiah 

14 King Zedekiah afterwards sent and had Jeremiah 
brought to him at the third entry that leads into the 
Temple ; and the king said to Jeremiah, " I am going 
to ask you a question which you are to answer me 

15 unreservedly." " If I tell you," said Jeremiah, " are 
you not certain to put me to death ? besides, any advice 

16 I give you, you will simply disregard." Then, in secret, 
the king swore the following oath to Jeremiah, " As 
Jehovah Uveth, who created this life of ours, I assure 
you solemnly that I will neither put you to death nor 
deUver you into the hands of those men that are seek- 

17 ing your life." Then said Jeremiah to Zedekiah, 
"Thus saith Jehovah, If you surrender voluntarily to 
the officers of the king of Babylon, your hfe will be 
spared, and this city shall not be burned with fire, but 

18 you and your family will be spared. If, however, you 
refuse to surrender, then this city shall be delivered 
into the hands of the Chaldeans, who will burn it with 
fire ; and you shall not escape from their hands." 

19 Then the king said to Jeremiah, " I am afraid of the 
Jews who have gone over to the Chaldeans ; I may 
be handed over to them and subjected to violence." 

20 " No," said Jeremiah, " you will not be handed over. 
But I entreat you to listen to what I say — it is the 
voice of Jehovah : your happiness and your life depend 

21 upon it. But if you refuse to surrender, then this is 
the message revealed to me in a vision by Jehovah 

22 — mark it well ; (I saw) all the women that are left in 

139 



Jeremiah 



the palace of the king of Judah brought out to the chief 
officers of the king of Babylon, chanting the while this 
song : 

Thy most excellent friends have beguiled 

And prevailed over thee, 
.Thy feet they have thrust in the mire, 
And thus sinking have left thee.* 

23 All your wives and children they shall bring out to 
the Chaldeans, and you yourself shall not escape ; you 
will be seized by the hand of the king of Babylon ; and 
this city shall be burned with fire." 

24 " Well, then," said the king to him, " let nobody 
know anything of this conversation, or else you are a dead 

25 man. If the courtiers hear that I have been talking 
with you, and come and ask you to tell them un- 
reservedly, on pain of death, what you have been saying 

26 to the king and the king to you, then just tell them that 
you were presenting a petition to the king that you 
should not be taken back to Jonathan's house, where 

27 you were in danger of perishing." In point of fact, the 
courtiers did all come to Jeremiah and question him ; 
and the story he told them was in entire accordance 
with the king's instructions. So they said no more to 
him, for no part of the conversation had been heard. 

28a Jeremiah accordingly remained in the guard-court 
till the day Jerusalem was taken. 

Provision made for Jeremiah's safety after the 
Capture of Jerusalem 

28b When Jerusalem was taken, all the chief officers of 
xxxix. 3 the king of Babylon came and took their seats 

140 



Jeremiah 



in the middle gate — Nergalsharezeri the Rab-mag, 
Nebushazban the Rab-saris, and all the rest of the 
14 officers of the king of Babylon.2 They sent and had 
Jeremiah brought from the guard-court, and delivered 
him to Gedaliah,3 the son of Ahikam, the son of 
Shaphan, to be taken to his own home* ; so he stayed 
among the people. 

The Capture of Jerusalem 

1 In5 the tenth month of the ninth year ofZedekiah, 
king of Judah, Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon came 
with all his forces against Jerusalem and laid siege to 

2 it. On the ninth day of the fourth month of the 
eleventh year of Zedekiah a breach was made in the 

4 city. On6 observing this, Zedekiah, king of Judah, and 
all the soldiers took to flight, leaving the city during the 
night by way of the royal garden, by the gate between 
the two walls, and they made for the Jordan valley. 

5 But the Chaldean arniy pursued them and overtook 
Zedekiah in the steppes of Jericho. They seized him 
and brought him to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, 
who was at Riblah in the district of Hamath, and he 

6 pronounced judgment upon them. At Riblah the 
king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his 
eyes, and all the noblemen of Judah also did the king 

7 of Babylon slay. He then put out Zedekiah's eyes, 
and loaded him with chains to carry him to Babylon. 

8 The palace and the houses of the people the Chaldeans 
burned with fire, and the walls of Jerusalem they 

9 demolished. The rest of the people that were left in the 
city, and the deserters who had gone over to him, and 

141 



Jeremiah 



those that were left of the artificers, Nebuzaradan, the 
commander of the guard, carried to exile in Babylon. 

10 Some of the poor people who had nothing were left by 
Nebuzaradan, the commander of the guard, in the land 
of Judah, and presented at the same time with vine- 
yards and fields. 

11 With regard to Jeremiah, Nebuchadrezzar, king of 
Babylon, had instructed Nebuzaradan, the commander 

12 of the guard, to do him no harm, but to take and look 
well after him and treat him according to his own 

13 instructions. So a messenger was despatched from 
Nebuzaradan, the commander of the guard, and 
Nebushazban, the Rab-saris, and Nergalsharezer, the 
Rab-mag, and all the chief officers of the king of 
Babylon. 9 

Jeremiah's Gracious Promise to Ebedmelech 

15 During Jeremiah's detention in the guard-court, 
there had come to him this message from Jehovah : 

16 Go and say to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian,io Thus saith 
Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : I will bring upon 
this city all that I have said — for evil and not for good, 
and in that day it will be accompHshed before thine 

17 eyes. But, saith Jehovah, I will deHver thee on that 
day, and thou shalt not be given into the hands of the 

18 men thou dreadest. I will save thee without fail ; 
thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thou shalt escape 
with thy life, because, saith Jehovah, thou hast put 
thy trust in Me. 



142 



Jeremiah 



EXPERIENCES OF JEREMIAH AFTER THE 
CAPTURE OF JERUSALEM (xl.-xliv.) 

Jeremiah Elects to Remain in Palestine 
xl. 

1 The message which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah 
after he had been released from Ramahi by Nebuzar- 
adan, the commander of the guard, who had found him 
there in chains among the captives of Jerusalem and 
Judah, who were being carried to exile in Babylon. 

2 The commander of the guard took Jeremiah and said 
to him : " Jehovah, your God, pronounced this doom 

3 upon this place, and He has kept His word. You 
have sinned against Him and refused to listen to His 

4 voice, and so this thing is come upon you. But see now, 
I will release you at once from the chains on your hands. 
If you are disposed to accompany me to Babylon 
come and I will look well after you ; but if not, then 
leave it alone. The whole land is before you ; go 

5 wherever you choose and prefer. Go back2 to Gedaliah, 
the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king 
of Babylon has appointed Governor of the cities of 
Judah : stay with him among the people or go wherever 
you choose." Then the commander of the guard 
dismissed him with a gift of provisions and a present. 

6 So Jeremiah went to Gedaliah at Mizpah,* where he 
stayed with him among the people left in the land. 

Assassination of Gedaliah the Governor of Judah 

7 When all the commanders of the  forces in the open 
field, together with their men, heard that the king of 
Babylon had appointed Gedaliah Governor of the land,'| 

143 



j eremiah 



and charged him with the oversight of the men, women 
and children, and of the poorest of the land, such as 

8 had not been carried to exile in Babylon, they came 
with their men to Gedaliah at Mizpah — Ishmael the 
son of Nethaniah, Johanan and Jonathan the sons of 
Kareah, Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of 
Ephai of Netophah,6 and Jezaniah, the son of the 

9 Maacathite.7 And Gedaliah gave his oath to them and 
their men: "Don't be afraid," he said, "of the 
Chaldean officials. You will prosper if you stay in the 

10 land and serve the king of Babylon. As for myself, 
I will reside at Mizpah, to represent your interests 
when the Chaldean (officials) visit us ; and you can 
gather wine, fruit, and oil, and store them up and live 

11 in the towns you take possession of." Further, all the 
Jews that were in Moab, Ammon, Edom, or elsewhere, 
when they heard that the king of Babylon had granted 
permission to some to remain in Judah and had ap- 

12 pointed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam Governor, they 
all returned to Judah from all the places to which they 
had been driven — to GedaHah at Mizpah — and they 
gathered immense stores of wine and fruit. 

13 Now Johanan the son of Kareah and all the com- 
manders of the forces in the open field came to Gedaliah 

14 at Mizpah, and asked him whether he was aware 
that Baalis king of Ammon had sent Ishmael the son of 
Nethaniah to assassinate him. But Gedaliah would 

15 not believe it. Then Johanan, in a secret audience with 
Gedaliah at Mizpah, said to him : "I beseech you to 
allow me to go and slay Ishmael. Nobody need know. 
Why should he take your life ? that will mean the 
scattering of all the Jews that have gathered round 

144 



Jeremiah 



i6 you, and the ruin of all that is left of Judah." " No," 
said Gedaliah to Johanan, " do nothing of the kind : 
xli. what you say of Ishmael is not true." 

1 In the seventh month, however, Ishmael, the son 
of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, a member of the 
royal family, accompanied by one of the chief officers of 
the king and ten (other) men, paid a visit to Gedaliah 

2 at Mizpah. While they were all dining together there, 
Ishmael and the ten men who accompanied him rose 
and with the sword smote and slew Gedaliah, whom the 
king of Babylon had appointed Governor of the land, 

3 together with all the Jews who were with him in 
Mizpah and all the Chaldean soldiersi who happened 
to be there. 

Murder of Pilgrims and Flight of Gedaliah's Assassin 

4 The day after the murder of Gedaliah, of which no 

5 one was yet aware, eighty pilgrims from Shechem, 
Shiloh,2 and Samaria, with beards shaven, clothes rent 
and gashes (on their bodies), came with vegetable offer- 
ings and frankincense in their hand to present them at 

6 the house of Jehovah.  Ishmael went out from Mizpah 
to meet them, and they were weeping* as they went 
along. When he met them, he invited them to come to 

7 Gedaliah ; but when they were well within the town, 
he and the men who accompanied him slew them at 

8 the cistern. 5 Ten of their number, however, entreated 
Ishmael not to kill them : "for we have stores of 
wheat," they said, " and barley, oil, and honey, buried 
in the ground." So he let them alone and did not 

9 consign them to the doom of their brethren. Now 
the cistern into which Ishmael had cast all the corpses 

145 

19 



Jeremiah 



of the men he had slain was the great cistern which 
had been constructed by king Asa in his war against 
Baasha, king of Israel ; and this Ishmael filled with the 
slain. 

10 Then Ishmael carried away captive all the rest of the 
people that were at Mizpah, the princesses and all the 
people left in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan, the com- 
mander of the guard, had committed to the charge of 
Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam ; and he started across to 

11 Ammon. But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and 
all the commanders of the forces that were with him, 

12 heard of all the atrocities perpetrated by Ishmael, they 
took all their men and set out to attack him ; and they 

13 found him by the great waters of Gibeon.s All the 
14a people with Ishmael — all that he had carried captive 
13& from Mizpah — when they saw Johanan and the com- 
manders of the forces that were with him, were filled 
14b with joy ; and turning about, they came back and 

15 joined Johanan. But Ishmael, escaping with eight 
men, repaired to Ammon. 

16 Then Johanan and all the commanders of the forces 
that were with him, took all the rest of the people whom 
Ishmael had carried away captivei' from Mizpah, after 
his assassination of Gedahah the son of Ahikam — men, n 
women, and eunuchs, whom he had brought back from 

17 Gibeon. Then they took their journey and stayed 
awhile at the sheepfoldsi of Chimham in the neighbour- 
hood of Bethlehem, from which they intended to 

18 travel to Egypt ; for they were in terror of the 
Chaldeans, because Ishmael had assassinated Gedaliah, 
whom the king of Babylon had appointed Governor of 
the land. 

146 



Jeremiah 



Migration of the Jews to Egypt in Defiance of 

Jeremiah's Counsel 

xlii. 

1 Then all the commanders of the forces, together 
with Johanan, and Azariah,i the son of Hoshaiah, and 

2 all the people great and small, approached Jeremiah 
the prophet with a petition, which they commended to 
his most favourable consideration, that he would pray 
for them, remnant as they were, to Jehovah his God. 
" We are left," they said, " but a few out of many, as 

3 you see with your own eyes. Let Jehovah your God 
tell us the way we should go and the thing we should do." 

4 Jeremiah replied, " I have heard you ; I promise to 
pray to Jehovah our God, as you request ; and what- 
ever be Jehovah's answer I will tell you unreservedly." 

5 Whereupon they said to Jeremiah, " Jehovah be our 
true and faithful Witness that we will act entirely in 
accordance with any message that Jehovah your God 

6 may send us. We have sent you to Jehovah our God ; 
and, be it welcome or unwelcome, we will obey His 
voice, and so enjoy the prosperity that comes from 
obedience to the voice of Jehovah our God." 

7 After an interval of ten days, Jeremiah received a 

8 message from Jehovah. He accordingly summoned 
Johanan and all the commanders of the forces that 
were with him, and all the people, small and great, 

9 and thus he addressed them. " Thus saith Jehovah, 
the God of Israel, to whom you sent me to present your 

10 suppHcation : If you remain quietly in this land, I will 
build you up and not throw you down ; I will plant you 
and not pluck you up ; for I am grieved at the misery 
147 



Jeremiah 



11 I have brought upon you. You are afraid of the king of 
Babylon, but do not be afraid of him, saith Jehovah ; 
do not be afraid of him, for I will be with you, to save 

12 you and to deliver you from his hand. I will have 
pity upon you and inspire him with pity for you, so 
that he will allow you to remain in your own land. 

13 You may, however, disregard the voice of Jehovah your 

14 God, and refuse to remain in this land : you may say, 
' No ; we will go to the land of Egypt, where we shall 
see no war and hear no sound of trumpet and never 
suffer for lack of bread — and there we shall make our 

15 home.' In that case I call upon you that are left of 
Judah to listen to the message of Jehovah. Thus saith 
Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : If you are really 
determined to proceed to Egypt, and if you go and settle 

16 there, then the sword that you fear shall overtake you 
there in the land of Egypt, and the hunger that you 
dread shall cling to your heels there in Egypt, and there 

17 ye shall die ; and all the men that were determined 
to go and settle in Egypt shall die by the sword, famine, 
and pestilence ; not one shall survive or escape the dis- 

18 aster that I will bring upon them. For thus saith 
Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : As Mine anger 
and fury have been poured out upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, so shall My fury be poured out upon you 
when ye enter Egypt ; and ye shall be an object of 
execration and horror, of cursing and scorn ; and ye 
shall see this place no more. 

19 This is Jehovah's message to you that are left of 
Judah : ' Do not go to Egypt.' But now* be very sure 

20 of this — I this day lay witness against you ; you have 
done yourselves a grievous wrong. » You have sent 

148 



Jeremiah 



me to Jehovah your God with the request that I should 
pray for you to Jehovah, and promising to act in 
entire accordance with the will of Jehovah when I 

21 declared it to you ; but when I did declare it this day, 
you refused to Usten to the voice of Jehovah in respect 

22 of any part of my commission. Now therefore be very 
sure of this, that ye shall die by the sword, famine, 
and pestilence, in the land where it is your desire to 

xliii. go and settle." 

1 Wlien Jeremiah had finished addressing to the 
assembled people all these words with which Jehovah 

2 had commissioned him, Azariah, the son of Hoshaiah, 
and Johanan the son of Kareah and all the defiant and 
insolenti men exclaimed to Jeremiah, " You are a liar; 
you have no commission to us from Jehovah to warn 

3 us against going and settling in Egypt ; but it is Baruch 
the son of Neriah who is setting you on against us with 
the object of delivering us into the hands of the 
Chaldeans, to be killed or transported to Babylon." 

4 So Johanan and all the commanders of the forces and 
all the people refused to listen to the voice of Jehovah 
which urged them to remain in the land of Judah. 

5 Accordingly Johanan and all the commanders of the 
forces took all that were now left of Judah — those that 
had come back from all the nations to which they had 

6 been driven, to settle in the land of Judah — the men, 
the women, the princesses, and all the persons whom 
Nebuzaradan, the commander of the guard, had left 
in the charge of Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son 
of Shaphan, including Jeremiah the prophet and Baruch 

7 the son of Neriah ; and, disregarding the voice of 
Jehovah, they went to Egypt and arrived at Daphnae.2 

149 



Jeremiah 



Jeremiah Predicts the Conquest of Egypt by 
Nebuchadrezzar 

8 In Daphnae Jeremiah received the following message 

9 from Jehovah : " Take large stones in thy hand and 
hide them away in secret at the porch of Pharaoh's 
residence in Daphnae in the presence of a few of the 

10 men of Judah, and say to them, Thus saith Jehovah : 
Mark this well — I will send and bring Nebuchadrezzar 
the king of Babylon My servant, who shah set his 
throne above these stones thou hast buried* and spread 

11 his glistening tapestry over them. He shall come and 
smite the land of Egypt, devoting to death those 
doomed to death, to captivity those doomed to captivity, 

12 to the sword those doomed to the sword.» He shall 
kindle a fire in the temples of the gods of Egypt, he shall 
bum them and carry them aWay captive, and he shall 
clear the land of Egypt, as a shepherd clears his mantle 
of vermin, 7 and then he shall depart from it in comfort. 

13 Also he will shatter the obelisks of Bethshemesh, in the 
land of Egypt, and the temples of the gods of Egypt he 
will burn with fire." 

Jeremiah Denounces the Jews in Egypt for their 

Idolatrous Worship of the Queen of Heaven 

xHv. 

1 Concerning all the Jews whose home was in Egypt — 
at Migdol, Daphnae, Memphis, and in upper Egypt — 

2 Jeremiah received the following message : " Thus 
saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel : Ye have 
seen with your own eyes all the misery that I have 
wrought upon Jerusalem and upon all the cities of 

150 



Jeremiah 



Judah. Ye see what they are to-day — desolate and 

3 uninhabited — as a consequence of their wicked be- 
haviour which provoked Mine indignation ; for they 
went and burned sacrifice in the service of other gods, 
unknown alike to them or to you or your forefathers ; 

4 and that, though early and late I had been sending to you 
My servants the prophets to warn you against these 

5 abominable practices that I detest. But they refused 
to listen or incline their ear : they would not abandon 

6 their wickedness or cease sacrificing to other gods. And 
so Mine anger and fury were poured forth : it blazed in 
the cities of Judah and on the streets of Jerusalem, so 
that they became the waste and the desolation that 
they are to-day. 

7 Now, therefore, thus saith Jehovah, the God of Hosts, 
the God of Israel : Why are ye doing yourselves this 
great wrong, which can only end in the utter extermin- 
ation of Judah, man and woman, child and babe ? 

8 Why are ye vexing Me with the fabrications of your 
hands, burning sacrifice to other gods in the land of 
Egypt, where ye have come to settle ? All this 
can only end in your extermination and in your being 
cursed and scorned by every nation in the world. 

9 Have you forgotten the crimes of your forefathers and 
of the kings and princesi of Judah, the crimes, too, 
your own wives committed in the land of Judah and on 

10 the streets of Jerusalem ? To this day they have 
remained unhumbled and unafraid. They have not 
Uved in accordance with My law or with the statutes 
I set before you and your forefathers. 

11 Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of 
Israel : Mark this — I will set My face against you for 

151 



Jeremiah 



12 evil, tojexterminatejjudah utterly. I will take the 
remnant of Judah that were determined to come and 
settle in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Egypt 
they shall all be consumed ; they shall fall by the sword 
and by famine ; small and great, they shall die by the 
sword and by famine, and they shall be an object of 

13 execration and horror, of cursing and scorn ; and, 
as I have punished Jerusalem by sword, famine, and 
pestilence, so will I punish those that have made Egypt 

14 their home, that not a man of the remnant of Judah 

which has come to settle in Egypt shall escape or 

survive to return to the land of Egypt for which 

they shall yearn ; for none but a fugitive or two 

shall return." 

15 Then the great gathering, composed of all the men 
who were aware that their wives burned sacrifice to 
other gods, and all the women that were standing by, 2 

16 replied to Jeremiah thus : " We refuse to listen to this 
message of yours that you have communicated to us in 

17 the name of Jehovah : but we will most assuredly 
keep our solemn oath to bum sacrifice to the Queen 
of Heaven and to pour out drink-offerings in her 
honour as we used to do — we and our fathers, our 
kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah and on the 
streets of Jerusalem. Then we had plenty of food, we 

18 lived well and were untouched by misfortune. But 
ever since the day we ceased burning sacrifice to the 
Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink-offerings in 
her honour, we have been utterly destitute, and sword 

19 and famine have consumed us. Yes," said the women,* 
" as for our offering of sacrifice to the Queen of Heaven 
and pouring out drink-offerings in her honour — have 

152 



Jeremiah 



we not had the approval of our husbands in making cakes 
for her stamped with her image, and in pouring her 
out drink-offerings ?" 

20 Such was the answer of all the people, men and 
women. Then Jeremiah addressed them as follows : 

21 " Yes, you did indeed burn your sacrifices in the cities of 
Judah and on the streets of Jerusalem — you and your 
fathers, your kings and your princes and commons ; 
and is it not precisely this that rankled in the mind and 

22 heart of Jehovah, till He could bear your wicked and 
abominable conduct no longer, with the result that your 
country is become the uninhabited desolation, the 

23 horror, the curse that it is to-day ? It is because you 
have offered such sacrifices, sinning against Jehovah, dis- 
obeying the voice of Jehovah, refusing to live in 
accordance with His laws. His statutes. His expressed 
will : that is why the misery of to-day is come upon 
you." 

24 Further, Jeremiah said to the people and the women 
assembled : " Listen to the message of Jehovah, all ye 

25 Jews that are in the land of Egypt. Thus saith Jehovah 
of Hosts, the God of Israel : Verily you women 
have indeed carried out your solemn resolve faithfully 
to perform the vows you have taken upon you, to burn 
sacrifice to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink- 
offerings in her honour. Well, then, keep your word 

26 and perform your vows. But listen now to the word of 
Jehovah, all ye Jews who have made Egypt your home. 
Mark this well : I have sworn, saith Jehovah, by My 
great name, that never again in all the land of Egypt 
shall My name be uttered by the lips of any man of 
Judah in the oath ' As truly as the Lord Jehovah 

153 



Jeremiah 



27 liveth.' Mark ! I am watching over them for evil 
and not for good; and every man of Judah in the 
land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by 

28 famine, until there bean end of them. Some who 
escape the sword in Egypt shall return to Judah, but 
they shall be few in number ; and then all the remnant 
of Judah that have come to settle in Egypt shall know 
whose word it is that stands — Mine or theirs. 

29 And this, saith Jehovah, shall be to you the sign 
• that I will punish you in this place, to teach you that 

My threats of disaster shall be confirmed upon you. 

30 Thus saith Jehovah : I will give Pharaoh Hophra, king 
of Egypt, into the hands of his enemies and of those that 
seek his life, as I gave Zedekiah, king of Judah, into 
the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, his 
enemy that sought his life." 

Words of Mingled Rebuke and Promise 

Addressed to Baruch 

xlv. 

1 This is the message that Jeremiah the prophet 
delivered to Baruch the son of Neriah, after he had 
written these words in a book to Jeremiah's dictation 
in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king 

2 of Judah. " This, Baruch, is the message to thee from 
Jehovah, the God of Israel, 

3 Thou hast said, * Woe is me ! for Jehovah 

To my pain hath added sorrow ; 
With groaning I am weary. 
And I have found no rest.' 

4 Let this be thy message to him, Thus saith Jehovah : 

154 



Jeremiah 



When / must destroy what I built, 
And when / must uproot what I planted, 2 
Shalt thou seek great things for thyself ? 
Seek them not ; for, behold, I will bring 
On all flesh, saith Jehovah, disaster ; 

But thou, wheresoever thou comest. 
By My grace, shalt escape with thy life." 



155 



ORACLES AGAINST FOREIGN NATIONS 

(xlvi.-li) 

Oracle on Egypt 

xlvi. 

1 The message concerning the nations which Jeremiah 
the prophet received from Jehovah. 

2 On Egypt. 

Concerning the army of Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt 
at Carchemishi on the river Euphrates, where it was 
defeated by Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, in the 
fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of 
Judah. 

3 Set the buckler and shield in array. 

And draw nigh for the battle. 

4 Harness the steeds, mount the chargers. 

Stand forth in your helmets. 

Polish your spears, don your breastplates. 

5 Why are they turned in dismay — 

Their warriors crushed, 
Fled apace without once looking backward, 
By terror beset ? 

6 The swift cannot flee, 

Nor the strong man escape : 
North by the banks of Euphrates 
They stumble and fall. 

156 



Jeremiah 



7 Who is this that rose up like the Nile, 

Whose waters toss like floods ? 

8 It is Egypt that rose like the Nile, 

Whose waters toss Uke floods. 
" I will rise, I will cover the earth, 

And destroy," said he, " her inhabitants. 

9 Up, steeds ; rage, ye chariots ; 

And forth, ye warriors, march — 
Cush and Put, that handle the shield. 
And ye Ludim, that bend the bow." 

10 But that day is the Lord Jehovah's — 

A day of revenge on His foes. 
When the sword2 shall devour to its till, 

And be drunken with their blood. 
For Jehovah of Hosts hath a sacrifice 

In the northern land, by Euphrates. 

11 Up to Gilead, fetch thee balsam, 

O virgin daughter of Egypt ; 
In vain dost thou multiply medicines. 
No healing is there for thee. 

12 The nations have heard thy wail,* 

And the earth is full of thy cry ; 
For warrior stumbles on warrior. 
Both are fallen together. 

13 The message of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet, that 
Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, would come and 
smite the land of Egypt. 

14 Tell it in Migdol, 

Publish it in Memphis : 
Say, " Take thy stand and prepare. 

For the sword hath devoured round about thee." 

157 



Jeremiah 



15 Wherefore is Apis fled ? 

Thy mighty one held not his ground, 
Because down he was thrust by Jehovah, 

16 The strangers among thee are fallen, 

And prostrate, they say each to other, 
" Let us flee from the murderous sword. 
Let us rise and go back to our people. 
To the land wherein we were born." 

17 Call Pharaoh of Egypt " Blusterer, 

Who hath let the hour go by." 

18 As I live, saith the King, whose name 

Is Jehovah of Hosts : One shall come 
Like Tabor among the mountains. 
Or Carmel by the sea. 

19 O daughter that dwellest in Egypt, 

Prepare thee to go into exile ; 
For Noph is become like a desert, 
An uninhabited waste. 

20 A graceful heifer is Egypt, 

But a wasp from the north hath assailed her. 
21c For the day of disaster hath reached her, 

f The time of her visitation, 

a The warriors, too, that she hired, 

b Were like unto fatted calves : 

c As for them, together they turned 

d And fled, without making a stand. 
22a She hissethi9 like a serpent 

b Against the advancing hosts ; 
23c For more are they than locusts, 

d So many they cannot be counted. 

158 



Jeremiah 



22C Against her they come with axes, 
Like men that hew down trees, 



23a " Fell," saith Jehovah, " her forest, 
b For it is impenetrable." 

24 Put to shame is the daughter of Egypt, 

To men from the north given over. 

25 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

The God of Israel : 
See ! Amonii of Thebes I will punish, 
And Pharaohi2 and those that trust him ; 

26 And I will deliver them over 

To those that seek their life. 
To the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, 

King of Babylon, and his servants. 
But afterwards she shall be peopled 

As in days of old, saith Jehovah. 

27 Soi3 fear them not, O Jacob My Servant ; 

Israel, be not dismayed, saith Jehovah. 
For see ! I will save both thee and thine offspring 

From the far distant land where captive ye lie. 
And Jacob once more shall have quiet and ease 
In his own land, with no one to make him afraid 

28 So fear thou not, O Jacob My Servant, 

For I, saith Jehovah, am with thee (to save thee). 
An end I will make of the nations — 

Of each, among whom I have driven thee ; 
But of thee I will not make an end. 

1 will not leave thee wholly unpunished. 
But in measure I will chastise thee. 

159 



Jeremiah 

Oracle on the Philistines 

xlvii. 

1 The message concerning the Philistines which 
Jeremiah the prophet received from Jehovah, before 
Pharaoh smote Gaza. Thus saith Jehovah : 

2 From the north, see ! waters are rising. 

They swell to a raging torrent : 
They will sweep o'er the land and its fulness. 

The city and (all) her inhabitants. 
Men shall utter a cry. 

Those that dwell in the land shall howl. 

3 At the noise of the hoofs of his galloping steeds, 

At the rush of his chariots, the roar of his wheels. 
The father shall not look behind for the children ; 
For all unnerved shall they be — 

4 Because of the day of destruction 

That cometh on all the Philistines, 
Sweeping from Tyre and Sidon 

All helpers that yet remain ; 
For Jehovah shall work destruction 

On all that are left in the coast-land, i 

5 Baldness is come upon Gaza, 

Ashkelon is destroyed. 
O ye that are left of the Anakim, 

How long must ye gash yourselves* yet ? 

6 "Ah ! Sword of Jehovah !& 

How long will it be ere thou rest ? 
Into thy scabbard get thee. 
And keep thee quiet and still." 
i6o 



Jeremiah 



7 But how can it be quiet, 

Since Jehovah hath given it a charge ? 
He hath destined it for Ashkelon, 
And for the shore washed by the sea. 

Oracle on Moab 
xlviii. 

1 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, the God of Israel 
Alas for the ruin of Nebo ! 

Kiriathaim is taken, 

Misgab is shamed and dismayed. 

2 The renown of Moab is vanished, 

In Heshbon they plotted her ruin : 
" Come, let us blot out the nation ; 
Thou, Madmen, shalt be silenced. 
The sword shall follow thee hard." 

3 Hark ! a shriek from Horonaim — 

Havoc and fell destruction. 

4 Moab is destroyed. 

The shriek can be heard far as Zoar,2 

5 They climb the ascent to Luhith, 

Weeping the while as they go ; 
For the path that leads down to Horonaim 
Is ringing with cries of destruction. 

6 Fly, escape for your lives, 

Though like bare desert shrub shall ye be. 

7 Thou hast trusted in thy strongholds, 

And therefore art thou taken : 
Chemosh* shall pass into exile. 

His priests and his princes together. 
i6i 



11 



Jeremiah 



8 Upon every city the spoiler shall come, 

No city shall escape ; 
The valleys shall also perish, 

And the table-land be destroyed, 
In accord with the word of Jehovah. 

9 Give ye wings unto Moab, 

For fain would she fly away 
From her cities that shall be desolate 
And empty altogether. 

10 Cursed be he that doeth 

The work of Jehovah remissly ; 
And cursed be he that keepeth 
His sword from (shedding) blood. 

11 From his youth hath Moab been at ease. 

On his lees he hath quietly rested — 
Not emptied from vessel to vessel, 

Nor ever to exile borne ; 
So his taste remaineth in him. 

And his scent is all unchanged, 

12 Therefore days, saith Jehovah, are coming. 

When tilters I will send ; 
And they shall tilt him over 
And empty out his vessels, 
And dash his jars in pieces. 

13 And the hopes of Moab in Chemosh 

Shall be utterly disappointed. 
As Israel was disappointed 

In Bethel, wherein she trusted. 

14 How can ye claim to be heroes 

And mighty men of war, 
162 



Jeremiah 



15 When the spoiler of Moab is come up against her, 

And the flower of her youth is gone down to the 

slaughter ? 
Saith the King, whose name is Jehovah of Hosts. 6 

16 The ruin of Moab is nigh at hand. 

Her misery hasteth swiftly. 

17 Bemoan her, all ye her neighbours. 

All ye that know her name : 
Say, " How is the strong staff broken. 
The rod that was so fair ! " 

18 Come down from thy splendour and sit in the mire,« 

Thou daughter that dwellest in Dibon ; 
For the spoiler of Moab is come up against thee, 
Thy fortress he hath destroyed. 

19 Stand by the way and spy, 

O thou that dwellest in Aroer ; 
Ask of the fugitive men 

And the women that flee, " What hath chanced ? " 

20 " Moab is put to shame : 

She is broken ; howl ye and cry." 

21 Tell it by the Arnon that Moab is laid waste. Judg- 
ment is come upon the table-land — upon Holon, 

22 Jahzah, and Mephaath, upon Dibon, Nebo, and Beth- 

23 diblathaim, upon Kiriathaim, Beth-gamul, and Beth- 

24 meon, upon Keriyyoth and Bozrah, and all the cities 
of the land of Moab, far and near. 

25 Hewn off is the horn of Moab, 

And her arm is broken, saith Jehovah. 

26 Make ye her drunken, for she 

Hath been insolent towards Jehovah. 

163 



Jeremiah 



Yea, Moab hath clapped her hands,? 
And in turn shall she, too, be derided. 

27 For didst thou not hold Israel in derision ? Hath 
she then been detected in the company of thieves, that 
thou shakest thy head so, every time thou speakest of 
her? 

28 Leave the cities and dwell in the crags, 

Ye inhabitants of Moab ; 
And be like to the dove that nesteth 

In the holes of the rocks of the precipice. 

29 We have heard of the pride of Moab— 

How very proud is she — 
Of her crafty and arrogant pride. 
And the haughtiness of her heart. 

30 Well I know her arrogance. 

The falseness of her boasting. 

And the falseness of her behaviour. 

31 There shall therefore be wailing in Moab, 

Yea, shrieks from all quarters of Moab, 
And moans for the men of Kir-heres. 

32 For thee, O vine of Sibmah, 

Shall be weeping as men weep for Jazer. 
Thy branches passed over the sea. 

They reached as far as Jazer ; 
On thy summer fruits and their vintage 

Is the despoiler fallen. 

33 Gladness and mirth are vanished 

From Moab's garden-land ; 
No wine is trod in the presses, 
The merry shout I have stilled. 
And the shout that is raised is of battle. 
164 



Jeremiah 



34 Heshboni' and Elealeh cr out, 

And their voice doth reach unto Jahaz, 
From Zoar to Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyyah ; 

For the waters of Nimrim shall also be desolate. 
25 I will cause, saith Jehovah, to vanish from Moab 

Him that offereth in the high place, 

And doth sacrifice to his god. 

36 So my heart like a flute maketh moaning for Moab, 

My heart maketh moan for the men of Kir-heres ; 
For the gain they had gotten is perished. 

37 For every head is bald. 

And every beard is clipped : 
On every hand are gashes. 
On every loin is sackcloth. 

38 On Moab's roofs and squares 

Is universal wailing ; 
For Moab I have shattered 

Like a vessel that one despise th. 

39 How broken is Moab ! howl ye. 

How she turneth her back in shame ! 
Her neighbours shall all behold her 
With horror and derision. 

40 For thus saith Jehovah, Behold, 
One like a vulture shall swoop. 

And spread out his wings against Moab. 

41 Keriyyoth is taken, the strongholds are seized. 
That day shall the heart of the warriors of Moab 

Be like to the heart of a woman in anguish. 

42 As a nation, Moab shall perish 

For his insolence towards Jehovah. 

165 



Jeremiah 



43 Trap,i2 terror, and pit are before you, 

All ye that dwell in Moab. 

44 He that flies from the terror shall fall down the pit, 

He that creeps from the pit shall be caught in the 
trap. 
Yea, thisi I will bring upon Moab 
In the year of her visitation. 

45 In the shadow of Heshbon stand fugitives — 

All their strength now gone ; 
For a fire is gone forth from Heshbon, 

A flame from the house of Sihon, 
Devouring the temples of Moab's head. 

And the crown of the head of the sons of tumult.i* 

46 Woe unto thee, O Moab ! 

The people of Chemosh is perished ; 
Thy sons are taken captive. 

Thy daughters are led to captivity. 
Yet Moab I will restore 

In the latter days, saith Jehovah. 

Thus far is the judgment upon Moab. 



Oracle on Ammon 

xKx. 

1 Thus saith Jehovah : 

Hath Israel no sons, no heirs ? 
Why then hath Milcomi seized Gad, 
And his people inhabit her cities ? 

2 Therefore days, saith Jehovah, are coming, 

When over Rabbah2 of Ammon 
I will bring the alarum of war. 
166 



Jeremiah 



A desolate mound shall she be, 

And with fire shall her daughters be burned ; 
And Israel shall hold once more 

The land from which she was driven. 

Howl, ye children of Ammon, 

Your capital is ruined* ; 
And cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, 

Gird you with sackcloth and wail, 

And wander about in mourning ; 
For Milcom is gone into exile, 

His priests and his princes together. 
Why gloriest thou in thy valley. 

Thou daughter that livest at ease ; 
And trustest in thy reserves. 

Thinking no one shall ever assail thee. 
Behold, I will bring on thee terror, 

Saith the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, 

From all that are round about thee ; 
Ye shall all be driven headlong, 

And the wanderers none shall rally. 
But afterwards, saith Jehovah, 

The Ammonites I will restore. 

Oracle on Edom 

On Edom. 
Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 

Is wisdom no more in Teman ?7 
Is the wit of the prudent perished, 
Their wisdom vanished clean ? 
Turn, fly to retreats inaccessible. 
Ye that dwell in Dedan ;8 
167 



Jeremiah 



For I bring upon Esau his doom, 
The time of his visitation. 
9 Gleaners are come upon thee, 

Who will leave not a grape to glean ; 
Yea, thieves in the night are come, 
Who will wreck to their heart's content. 

10 For / have stripped Esau bare. 

And his lurking-place uncovered. 
So that hide himself he cannot. 
Destroyed is he to a man 

By the arm of his brethren and neighbours. 

11 Leave thine orphans, and I will preserve them ; 

Let thy widows trust in Me. 

12 For thus saith Jehovah : If those who did not 
deserve to drink the cupii must drink it nevertheless, 
how canst thou expect to go utterly unpunished ? 
Nay, verily, thou shalt not escape, but drink it thou 

13 shalt. For I have most solemnly sworn, saith Jehovah, 
that Bozrahi shall be a horror, a scorn, and a curse, 
and all her cities shall be perpetual wastes. 

14 Jehovah hath sent me tidings 

Of an envoy despatched to the nations. 
To bid them gather against her, 
And rise up to do battle. 

15 For small in the eyes of the nations. 

Yea, scorned among men, will I make thee. 

16 O how thou then wilt shudder ! i 

The pride of thy heart hath beguiled thee. 
Thou that hauntest the clefts of the crags. 

That boldest the heights of the hills. 
Though thou buildest thine eyrie as high as the eagle, 

Even thence to the ground will I bring thee. 
168 



Jeremiah 



17 And Edom shall be a horror ; 

Yea, horror-struck, all that pass by her 
Shall hiss at her many wounds. 

18 As when Sodom was overthrown, 

And Gomorrah and her neighbours, 
No man shall dwell therein. 
No mortal shall sojourn there. 

19 Behold, as a lion comes up 

To the pastures of sheepi* from the jungle of Jordan,! 
Even so will I chase them away, in a moment. 

And visit with vengeance their choicest rams.i 
Who is like Me ? who will challenge Me ? 

What shepherd is there that will face Me ? 

20 Therefore hear what Jehovah hath planned against 

Edom, 
And purposed against the inhabitants of Teman : 
The young shepherd lads shall be dragged away. 
And their homestead assuredly smitten with horror. 

21 At the sound of their fall the earth doth tremble. 

And far as the Red Sea their cry shall be heard. 

22 See ! one like a vulture shall swoop. 

And spread out his wings against Bozrah. 
That day shall the heart of the warriors of Edom 
Be like to the heart of a woman in anguish.i 



Oracle on Damascus 

23 HamathandArpadis are shamed, 

For tidings of evil hath reached them ; 
They melt for very care. 

They are restless, like the sea. 
169 



Jeremiah 



24 Damascus is all unstrung, 

She betaketh herself to flight. 
Trembling hath seized upon her, 
Anguish hath taken hold of her. 
And sorrow like that of a woman in travail. 

25 How forlorn is the famous city. 

The city of wondrous charm ! 

26 Ini9 her squares shall her young men lie fallen ; 

Her warriors all shall be silenced 
In that day, saith Jehovah of Hosts. 

27 I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, 

And the palaces of Benhadad it shall devour. 

Oracle on Certain Arabian Tribes 

28 On Kedar2o and the kingdomi of Hazor, which 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote. 

Thus saith Jehovah : 
Arise, get ye up unto Kedar, 
Despoil the sons of the East,22 

29 Their tents and their flocks shall be taken. 

Their hangings and all their vessels ; 
(The foe) shall seize their camels. 
And shout at them " Terrors encircle you. "2= 

30 Turn, fly to retreats inaccessible, 

Ye that dwell in Hazor ;24 
For Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon 

Hath purposed and planned to destroy you. 

31 "Arise and assail the nation 

That Uveth in ease and security. 
Strangers to gates and bars. 
And dwelling apart by themselves." 
170 



Jeremiah 



32 Their camels shall fall a prey, 

And the throng of their herds shall be plundered ; 
And those whose temples are clipped 

I will scatter to all the winds ; 
And I, saith Jehovah, will bring on them 

Ruin from every side. 

33 A haunt of jackals shall Hazor become, 

A perpetual desolation : 
No man shall dwell therein, 
No mortal shall sojourn there.25 



Oracle on Elam 

34 The message concerning Elams which Jeremiah the 
prophet received from Jehovah at the beginning of 
the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah. 

35 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 
I will break the bow of Elam, 

Chief weapon of their might. 

36 I will bring four winds upon them 

From the four ends of the heavens, 
And to all these winds will I scatter them. 
No nation shall there be 

Where the outcasts of Elam shall come not. 

37 I will fill them with dismay 

In the presence of their foes 

And of those that seek their life. 
And I will bring evil upon them, 

My glowing indignation ; 
I will send the sword to pursue them, 

Untii I have consumed them. 



Jeremiah 



38 I will set My throne in Elam, 
And thence will I destroy 
The king and the princes together. 
But Elam I will restore 

In the latter days, saith Jehovah. 

Oracle on Babylon 
1. 

1 The message concerning Babylon and the land of the 
Chaldeans that Jehovah communicated to Jeremiah 
the prophet. 

2 Tell ye the nations and publish it,i 

Publish it unreservedly, 
That Babylon is taken, 

Bel shamed, and Marduk2 dismayed. 
Her images are shamed. 

Her idol-blocks are dismayed ; 

3 For a folk from the north hath assailed her 

That shall desolate her land. 
So that none may dwell therein — 
Man, beast, are fled and gone. 

4 In those days, at that time, saith Jehovah, 

The children of Israel shall come 
With the children of Judah together ; 
They shall go on their way with weeping. 
And seek Jehovah their God. 

5 For Zion shall they ask. 

With faces hitherward turned, 
Saying, " Come, let us join Jehovah 

In a covenant everlasting, 
That never shall be forgotten." 
172 



Jeremiah 



6 Lost sheep have My people been, 

Their shepherds have led them astray, 
They have turned them away on the mountains ; 
From mountain to hill they have wandered. 
Forgetful of the fold. 

7 All have devoured them that found them : 

Their enemies said " We are guiltless " — 
For they had offended Jehovah, 
The Fold, where righteousness dwelleth, 
Jehovah, the Hope of their fathers. ** 

8 Flee ye from Babylon's midst, 

Get ye out from the land of Chaldea, 
Like he-goats before the flock. 

9 For behold ! I will rouse against Babylon 

A swarm of northern nations, 
That shall set their array against her. 

Until they have overcome her. 
They shall shoot like a skilful warrior, 

Who doth not return empty. 

10 Chaldea shall be despoiled, 

All that spoil her shall have their fill. 

11 Though ye rejoice and be glad, 

O ye that plunder My heritage ; 
Though ye gambol like calves in the grass. 
And neigh like stalwart horses ; 

12 Your mother shall deeply be shamed. 

And abashed shall she be that bore you — 
The hindermost of the nations, 
A wilderness dry and desert, 

13 An empty desolation. 

Because of the wrath of Jehovah. 
173 



Jeremiah 



Horror-struck, all that pass by her 
Shall hiss at her many wounds.  

14 Set your array round Babylon, 

All ye that bend the bow ; 
Shoot your arrows at her without stint, 
She hath sinned against Jehovah. 

15 Encircle her with your war-cry, 

Already she hath surrendered ; 
Her buttresses are fallen, 

Her walls are torn down. 
'Tis the vengeance of Jehovah : 

Avenge yourselves upon her. 

Do to her as she hath done. 

16 Root out of Babylon him that soweth, 

And him that wieldeth the sickle in harvest. 
To escape the murderous sword 
Shall each set his face to his people. 
And each to his own land flee. 

17 A scattered flock is Israel, 

By lions driven away. 
First, the king of Assyria devoured him. 
And now at the last his bones 
Have been gnawed by the king of Babylon. 

18 Therefore thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

The God of Israel : Behold, 
I will punish the king and the land of Babylon, 
As I punished the king of Assyria. 

19 But Israel I will bring back to his homestead, 

To pasture on Carmel and Bashan ; 
On Ephraim's hills and in Gilead 
He shall fare to his heart's content. 
174 



Jeremiah 



20 In those days, at that time, saith Jehovah, 

Though Israel should be searched, 
No guilt shall in her be found ; 

And no transgression in Judah 
Shall any man discover : 

For those whom I spare I will pardon. 

21 Get ye up to the land of Marrati, 

And the people that dwell in Pekod ;8 
Slay and destroy them utterly, 
And do all I command, saith Jehovah. 

22 Hark ! the alarum of war. 

In Chaldea fell destruction. 

23 How is she hewn and shattered — 

The Hammer of all the earth. 
What a horror among the nations 
Is Babylon become ! 

24 I snared thee, and thou hast been taken, 

O Babylon, unaware : 
Thou art discovered and caught", 
Because thou hast challenged Jehovah. 

25 Jehovah has opened His armoury. 

And brought forth His weapons of wrath 
For the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, 
Hath a work to do in Chaldea. 

26 Assail her from every quarter, 

Lay her granaries bare ; 

Pile her up Uke heaps of corn, 

And utterly destroy her ; 

Let nothing of her be left. 

27 Slay ye all her bullocks,io 

Down let them go to the slaughter. 
175 



Jeremiah 



Woe unto them : for their day is come. 
The time of their visitation. 

28 Hark ! how theyii flee, they escape 

Away from the land of Babylon 
To Zion, to tell how Jehovah, 
Our God, hath avenged His Temple. 

29 Call against Babylon archers, 

All those that bend the bow ; 
Camp round about against her, 

Let none of them escape. 
Requite her for all she hath done. 

And deal with her as she dealt. 
For her insolence towards Jehovah, 

The Holy One of Israel. 

30 Ini2 her squares shall her young men lie fallen, 

Her warriors all shall be silenced. 
In that day, saith Jehovah of Hosts. 

31 See, Insolence, I will assail thee, 

Saith the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts ; 
Because thy day is come. 
The time of thy visitation. 

32 Then shall Insolence stumble and fall, 

And none shall Uft her up ; 
I will kindle a fire in her forest,! 
Which shall all her thickets devour. 

33 Thus saith Jehovah pf Hosts : 
The children of Israel are crushed, 

And the children of Judah together ; 
Their captors hold them fast 
And refuse to let them go. 
176 



Jeremiah 



34 But mighty is their Redeemers- 

Jehovah of Hosts is His name. 
He will surely defend their cause, 
That He may give rest to the earth, 
And disquiet the people of Babylon. 

35 A sword upon the Chaldeans, 

Upon all the people of Babylon, 
Her princes and her wise men ! 

36 A sword upon her diviners ! 

And then shall their folly be manifest. 
A sword upon her warriors ! 

And then how dismayed shall they be ! 

37 A sword on her horses and chariots, 

And on all the strange folk in her midst ! 

And they shall become as women. 
A sword upon her treasures ! 

And plundered shall they be. 
1 38 A swordi4 upon her waters ! 

And dried up shall they be ! 
For she is a land of images. 

And with hideous (idols) they make themselves mad. 

39 S015 wild cats and wolves shall dwell there, 

And there shall ostriches dwell ; 
She shall not be re-peopled for ever. 
Or dwelt in through all generations. 

40 As when Sodom was overthrown, 

Gomorrah and her neighbours. 
No man shall dwell therein. 
No mortal shall sojourn there.i v 
177 

12 



Jeremiah 



41 See ! a people doth come from the north :i7 

A great nation and many kings 

From the ends of the earth bestir them. 

42 Bow they wield and javeHn — 

Cruel and pitiless they, 
With a voice Uke the roar of the sea, 

And they upon horses come riding. 
Arrayed, Hke one man, for the battle, 

Against thee, O daughter of Babylon. 

43 The rumour of them hath come 

To the ears of the king of Babylon, 
And he is all unstrung ; 
Anguish hath seized upon him 

And pangs as of woman in travail. 

44 Behold, as a Hon comes upis 

To the pastures of sheep from the jungle of Jordan, 
Even so will I chase them away in a moment. 

And visit with vengeance their choicest rams. 
Who is Uke Me ? Who will challenge Me ? 

What shepherd is there that will face Me ? 

45 Therefore hear what Jehovah hath planned against 

Babylon, 
And purposed against those that dwell ini9 Chaldea : 
The young shepherd lads shall be dragged away. 
And their homestead assuredly stricken with horror. 

46 At the shout, " She is taken," the earth doth tremble. 

And over the world their cry shall be heard. 



li. 



Thus saith Jehovah : 
Behold, I will raise against Babylon 
178 



Jeremiah 



And those that dwell in Chaldea 
The spirit of a destroyer. 

2 I will send upon Babylon winnowers 

Who shall winnow and empty her land : 
Yea, woe- shall beset her about 
In the day of her disaster. 

3 Let the archer bend his bow, 

Stand erect in his coat of mail ; 
Not one of her young men spare. 
But destroy her whole host utterly. 

4 Let them fall down slain in the land of Chaldea, 

And stabbed upon her streets. 

5c For their land is full of guilt 
d Against the Holy One of Israel ; 

a But Israel and Judah were not forsaken 
h By their God, Jehovah of Hosts. 

6 Fly from the midst of Babylon, 

Save every man his life. 
Lest her guilt bring destruction upon you. 
'Tis Jehovah's day of revenge. 

With a recompense He is requiting her. 

7 A golden cup is Babylon,* 

That made the whole earth drunken : 
The nations drank of her wine, 
And therefore are they gone mad. 

8 On a sudden she falls, she is shattered, 

Raise ye your wail over her ; 
Take balsam for her pain, 

Peradventure she may be healed. 

179 - 



Jeremiah 



9 We strove for Babylon's healing, 

But past all healing was she ; 
And so we now will leave her, 

And each to his own land go ; 
For her judgment reacheth to heaven, 

It mounts to the very clouds. 

10 Jehovah hath shown that the right was ours : 

Come, let us tell in Zion 

What Jehovah our God hath done. 

11 Polish the arrows. 

Furbish the shields ; 
For Jehovah hath stirred up 

The spirit of Media's king.s 
He hath planned for the ruin of Babylon ; 

For such is Jehovah's vengeance. 

The vengeance for His Temple. 

12 Hoist ye the flag for the march 

Against the walls of Babylon ; 
Strengthen the watch, set watchmen, 

And get the ambush ready : 
For Jehovah hath planned and accomplished 

His threats on the people of Babylon. 

13 Thou that art rich in treasure. 

And dwellest by many waters. 
Thine end is come, thy web is spun. 

14 Jehovah of Hosts hath most solemnly sworn : 

" I will fill thee with men who will swarm like locusts 
And lift up against thee a shout of triumph. 

15 He8 created the earth by His power. 

He established the world by His wisdom, 
He stretched out the heavens by His skill. 
180 



J 



eremiaJ 



i6 When He uttereth His voice, 

The waters roar in the heavens. 
And He causeth vapours to rise 

From the uttermost ends of the earth. 
Lightnings He made for the rain. 

And the wind He brings out of His storehouses. 

17 How foolish is man with his knowledge ! 

The goldsmith is shamed by his image ; 
His idols are a delusion. 
And breath in them is none. 

18 They are an empty mockery. 

In the hour of their trial they shall perish. 

19 Not such is the Portion of Jacob, 

His God is the Framer of all things ; 
Jehovah of Hosts is His name. 

20 My hammer of war hast thou been, 

With thee I have shattered the nations. 
With thee have I kingdoms destroyed, 

21 With thee horse and rider I shattered. 

And chariot and charioteer ; 

22 With thee man and woman I shattered, 

With thee old and young have I shattered. 
With thee youth and maid have I shattered, 

23 With thee flock and shepherd I shattered, 
• With thee team and ploughman I shattered. 

With thee lord and viceroy I shattered. 

24 And Babylon I will requite. 

And the people of all Chaldea, 
Before your eyes, saith Jehovah, 

For the wrong they have wrought upon Zion, 
181 



Jeremiah 



25 Behold, I will assail thee, 

Saith Jehovah, thou mount of destruction. 
That destroyest all the earth ; 
I will stretch out My hand against thee. 
And make thee a burning mountain. 

26 No corner-stones shalt thou furnish, 

And no foundation stones ; 
But thou, saith Jehovah, shalt be 
A perpetual desolation. 

27 Raise a banner upon the earth, 

Blow the trumpet among the nations ; 
Prepare the nations against her. 

Summon against her the kingdoms 

Of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz.io 
Muster your troops against her. 

And bring' up horses Uke locusts. 

28 Prepare the nations against her, 

King, lords, and viceroys of Media, 
And all the land that he ruleth. 

29 The earth is in tremor and anguish. 

For Jehovah's design against Babylon standeth- 
To make the land of Babylon 
An uninhabited waste. 

30 The warriors of Babylon cease fight, 

They stay within their fastnesses ; 
Their strength is all dried up, 

They are become like women. 
Her dwelling-places are burned. 

Her bars are shattered to pieces. 

31 Courier runs to meet courier. 

And messenger to meet messenger, 
182 



Jeremiah 



To tell the king of Babylon 

That on all sides his city is taken. 

32 The ferries have been seized, 

The defencesi2 are burned with fire, 
And the men of war are confounded. 

33 For thus saith Jehovah of Hosts, 

The God of Israel : 
The daughter of Babylon is now 

Like a threshing-floor, when it is trodden ; 
But yet a little while — 

And for her shall the harvest-time come. 

34 Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, 

Hath done me violent wrong : 
He hath left me an empty vessel. 

He hath swallowed me up like a monster ; 
He hath filled his maw with my dainties. 

And then hath cast me out. 

35 Let her that inhabiteth Zion declare, 

" The wrong done to me and my flesh be on Babylon ! 
Let Jerusalem say, " My blood 
Be on them that dwell in Chaldea ! " 

36 Thus therefore saith Jehovah : 
See ! I will defend thy cause. 

And I will take vengeance for thee ; 
Her sea I will dry up. 
And her fountain I will wither. 

37 Babylon shall become a ruin, 

A place that jackals haunt, 
A place of horror and hissing, 
A plare where no man dwelleth. 

183 



Jeremiah 



38 They roar like young lions together, 

They growl like lions' whelps ; 

39 I will give them the banquet they crave for, 

And make them drunk, that they swoon,i' 
And sleep their eternal sleep. 

To awake nevermore, saith Jehovah. 

40 I will bring them down to the slaughter, 

Like lambs or rams with goats. 

41 How is Sheshachi seized and taken. 

That was famous all over the world ! 
With what horror all the nations 
Are smitten at Babylon's fate ! 

42 The sea came up upon Babylon, 

' Neath the roar of her billows she sank. 

43 Her cities were turned to a waste, 

A dry and desert land : 
In them shall no man dwell, 
No mortal shall ever pass through them. 

44 I will punish BeP in Babylon, 

And make him disgorge what he swallowed.s 
No more shall the nations stream to him ; 
The wall of Babylon is fallen. 

45 Forth from her midst. My people, 

» Save every man his life 
From the glowing wrath of Jehovah. 

46 See that ye faint not nor fear 

At the rumours ye hear in the land. 
When one year one rumour cometh. 

And in the next another, 
And tyrant after tyrant 

Doeth violence in the earth. 



Jeremiah 



47 See therefore, the days are coming, 

When I will punish the idols of Babylon, 
And put her whole land to shame. 

And all shall fall slain in the midst of her. 

48 The heavens shall rejoice over Babylon, 

The earth, and all therein ; 
For spoilers shall come from the north 
And assail her, saith Jehovah. 

49 Yes, Babylon must fall 

For Israel's sons that are slain, 
As for Babylon are fallen 
The slain of all the earth. 

50 Ye that the sword have escaped. 

Depart ye, stand not still : 
Remember Jehovah afar, 

And bethink ye of Jerusalem. 
51 " We are shamed, wei7 have heard a reproach, 

And confusion hath covered our faces ; 
For strangers are entered in 

To the Holy House of Jehovah." 

52 See therefore, the days are coming 

WTien her images I will punish, 

And all through her land shall the wounded groan. 

53 Though Babylon mounted to heaven. 

And there in the heights built her fortress, 
Yet from Me should despoilers come 
And assail her, saith Jehovah. 

54 Hark ! 'tis a shriek from Babylon, 

Fell destruction in Chaldea, 

55 For Jehovah despoileth Babylon, 

He stilleth her mighty voice. 
185 



Jeremiah 



Theyis shall roar like many waters, 
And utter their clamorous din ; 

56 For the spoiler is come upon Babylon ; 

Her mighty men are taken, 
Their bows are broken in pieces : 
For Jehovah is a God of requitals, 
And He will repay without fail. 

57 Her princes I will make drunken. 

Her wise men and her governors, 
Her viceroys and her warriors ; 

They shall sleep their eternal sleep, 
To awake nevermore, saith the King, 

Whose name is Jehovah of Hosts. 

58 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : 

Babylon's broad wall shall be razed to the ground. 
And her towering gates in the fire shall be burned 

Thus endeth the toil of the peoples in nothing. 
The labour of nations is doomed to the flames. 



Jeremiah's Message to Babylon, Symbolic of 
her Doom 

59 The instructions given by Jeremiah the prophet to 
Seraiah,i9 the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, who 
acted as quester-master,2o when he accompanied 
Zedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth 

60 year of his reign. Now Jeremiah had recorded on a scroll 

61 all the misery that was to come upon Babylon ;2i and 
he said to Seraiah, " When you arrive at Babylon, see 

62 that you read all these words, and say : ' Thine, O 
Jehovah, are these words ; it is Thou that hast decreed 

186 



Jeremiah 



the destruction of this place — that never again shall it 
be a home for man or beast, but that it shall remain a 

63 desolation for ever.' When you have finished reading 
this scroll, tie a stone to it and throw it into the middle 

64 of the Euphrates, with the words : ' Thus shall Babylon 
sink, to rise no more, because of all the misery that I 
shall bring upon her.' "- 

Here end the words of Jeremiah.23 

The Capture of Jerusalem and the Exile of the 

People 

Hi. 

1 Zedekiah, who was twenty-one years of age when he 
came to the throne, reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem. 
His mother's name was Hamutal, a daughter of 

2 Jeremiah of Libnah. His actions were offensive to 

3 Jehovah, exactly as Jehoiakim's had been, and 
Jehovah was so angry wth Jerusalem and Judah that 
He cast them out of His sight ; and Zedekiah revolted 
against the king bi Babylon. 

4 On the tenth day of the tenth month of the ninth 
year of his reign Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, 
came with all his forces to storm Jerusalem. They 
pitched their camp against it, and surrounded it with 

5 a siege-wall ; so the city was under siege till the eleventh 

6 year of king Zedekiah.2 In the ninth day of the fourth 
month — the famine in the city being so severe that 

7 there was no bread for the people of the land — a 
breach was made in the city, and all the soldiers took 
to flight, leaving the city during the night by way of the 
gate between the two walls by the royal garden — 
the city being surrounded by the Chaldeans — and they 

187 



Jeremiah 



8 made for the Jordan valley. But the Chaldean army 
pursued the king and overtook him in the steppes of 
Jericho, all his own army having left him and scattered. 

9 They seized the king and brought him to the king of 
Babylon who was at Riblah* in the district of Hamath ; 

10 and he pronounced judgment upon him. At Riblah 
the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before 
his eyes, and all the princes of Judah did he also slay ; 

11 he then put out Zedekiah's eyes, and having loaded him 
with chains, he carried him to Babylon, where he kept 
him in the House of Discipline till the day of his death. 

12 On the tenth day of the fifth month of the nineteenth 
year of king Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, 
Nebuzaradan the commander of the guard, one of the 
ministers of the king of Babylon, entered Jerusalem ; 

13 and he proceeded to burn the Temple, the palace, and 

14 indeed every house in Jerusalem. All the walls that 
encircled Jerusalem were demolished by the Chaldean 
forces that were under the commander of the guard. 

15 The rest7 of the people left in the city, and the deserters 
who had gone over to the king of Babylon, and those 
that were left of the artificers, were carried into exile by 

16 Nebuzaradan the commander of the guard. Some of 
the poorest of the country people were left by Nebuzar- 
adan, the commander of the guard, to act as vine- 
dressers and ploughmen. 

17 The bronze pillars of the Temple, and the stands, 
and the bronze sea that was in the Temple, were broken 
in pieces by the Chaldeans, and all the bronze of them 

18 was taken to Babylon. They also took the pots and 
the shovels and the snuffers and the basons and the 
pans and all the bronze vessels used in the (Temple) 

19 service. The goblets and the snuff-dishes (for the 
lamps) and the basons and the pots and the lamp- 
stands and the pans and the libation bowls — whatever 
was of gold or silver respectively — were removed by the 

20 commander of the guard : — the pillars, two ; the sea 
one ; and the bronze bulls that supported the sea, 
twelve ; and the stands which King Solomon had 
made for the Temple, ten ; — vessels the mass of whose 

21 bronze was beyond weight. Each of the pillars was 
twenty-seven feet in height, eighteen feet in circum- 
ference, three inches in thickness, and hollow within. 

22 It was surmounted by a bronze capital, seven feet and a 
half in height, round which ran network and pome- 
granates of bronze throughout ; the (network and) 

23 pomegranate adornment of both pillars was alike. On 
the network round about there were a hundred pome- 
granates in all, of which ninety-six were visible.ii 

24 The commander of the guard also took Seraiah the 
chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the 

25 three keepers of the threshold. He took also from the 
city a eunuch who had charge of the soldiers, and seven 
of the King's Privy Councillors who were found in 
the city, and the secretary of the commander-in-chief, 
who kept the army register, and sixty of the people of 

26 the land whom he found within the city. Having 
seized them, Nebuzaradan, the commander of the guard, 
brought them to Riblah to the king of Babylon ; 

27 and the king of Babylon put them to death at Riblah 
in the district of Hamath. Thus was Judah carried 
from her own land into exile. 

28 These are the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried 
into exile ; in the seventeenth year (of his reign) 

29 three thousand and twenty -three Jews ; in the eight- 
eenth year of Nebuchadrezzar, eight hundred and 

30 thirty-two persons from Jerusalem ; in the twenty- 
third year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the 
commander of the guard carried seven hundred and 
forty-five Jews into exile : — in all, four thousand 
six hundred. 

A Gleam of Light in the Darkness of Exile 

31 In the thirty seventh year'* of the exile of Jehoiachin, 
king of Judah, in the twenty-fifth day of the twelfth 
month, Evil-merodach, in the year of his accession to 
the throne of Babylon, restored Jehoiachin, king of 

32 Judah, to favour, liberated him from prison, engaged 
him in friendly intercourse, and gave him precedence 
over the (other) kings who were (detained) with him 

33 in Babylon. He also changed his prison dress, and he 

34 dined at the royal table to the very end of his Ufe. A 
perpetual allowance, which was disbursed daily, was 
assigned him by the king of Babylon, and he continued 
to enjoy it all his life up to the day that he died. 



