THE SONG OF SONGS
i.
The Song of Songs,1 which is Solomon's.
The Bride Praises the Bridegroom, modestly depreciates her own Beauty, and asks where her Bridegroom is to be found 2
2 0 for a kiss from thy lips :
Thy caresses are better than wine.
3 Thy perfumes are fine in their fragrance ; As perfumes poured forth is thy name : And therefore the maidens (all) love thee.
4 Draw me after thee. 0 let us hasten :
0 king,3 bring me into thy chamber.
In thee we will joy and be glad ;
More than wine shall we praise thy caresses.
Yes, they are right who love thee.
5 I am dark,' but yet comely, Ye maids of Jerusalem, Like (dark) tents of Kedar, Like curtains of Solomon.
6 Eye me not strangely, Because I am dark :
'Tis the sun that hath scorched me.
Once the sons of my mother Were angry with me,
So they set me to watch the vineyards ;
217
The Song of Songs
But the vineyard that was mine owns I watched not at all.
7 0 tell me, beloved of my soul,
Where thou restest thy flock at the noon-tide ; For why should I wander in vain
And be found by the flocks of thy comrades ?
8 If thou dost not know at all,
0 thou of women the fairest,
Go forth on the trail of the flock,
Feed thy kids where the shepherds are tented.
Bride and Bridegroom sing each other's Praises
Dialogue
g " P liken thee, 0 my love,
To a filly in Pharaoh's chariot-
Io	cheeks all lovely with spangles,
Thy neck with strings of jewels ;
II And circlets of gold we will make thee
With pendants of silver."
12 " While the kings on his couch' is reclining, My spikenard yieldeth its fragrance.
13 A scent-bag of myrrh is my loved one, That lieth between my breasts.
14 My loYe is a cluster of henna
In the vineyards of En-gedi."
15 " 0 how fair," my love, art thou ;
How fair, with thy dove-like eyes !"
16 " 0 how fair,11 my beloved, how lovely ! And green is our bed.
218
The Song of Songs
17 Our house hath cedars for beams, And our rafters are fir.
ii.
A crocus of Sharon am I, A lily of the valleys."
2 " As a lily among the thorns,
So is my love among the daughters."
3 " As an apple-tree in the forest,
So is my love among the sons.
In his shadow I sit with delight,
And his fruit is sweet to my taste."
The Happiness of the Bride
4 To the house of wine he hath brought me, O'erhung with the banner of love.
5 Stay me with cakes of raisins, And strengthen me with apples, For faint with love am I.
6 His left arm was under my head, And his right arm round about me.
7 I adjure you, ye maids of Jerusalem, By the roes and the hinds of the field, That ye rouse not love2 nor awake her, Until it be her good pleasure.
A Spring Wooing
8 Hark, my beloved ! See, he cometh,
Leaping the mountains,
Skipping the hills.
9 See,2 there he standeth In front of our wall.
219
The Song of Songs
I• look from the window, peer through the lattice ; io And thus my beloved Makes answer to me.
" Arise, my beloved,
My fair, come away.
it For see ! the winter is past, The rain is over and go'ne,
12 The flowers appear in the land, The time for pruning' is come,
And the voice of the ring-dove is heard.
13 The figs on the fig-trees are reddening, The vines are all blossom and fragrance. Arise, my beloved,
My fair, come away.
14 0 my dove, from thy craggy retreat,
From thy hiding-place steep,
O show me thy face,
Let me hear thy voice ;
For thy voice is so sweet
And thy face is so lovely."
Is Take us the foxes, The little foxes,
That ruin our vineyards,8
Those blossoming vineyards.
i6 My beloved is mine, I am his : 'Along the lilies he pastures.
220
The Song of Songs
17 Till cool grows the day,
And the shadows depart,
0 turn, my beloved,
And sport like the roe
Or the playful gazelle
On the cleft-riven7 mountains.
The Bride's Dream
iii.
1 On my bed in the night did I seek The beloved of my soul. But I sought him in vain.
2 " I will rise and go over the city, Its streets and its squares.
I will seek the beloved of my soul." But I sought him in vain.
3 I was met by the watchmen who passed On their round of the city.
(" Tell me," I said), " have ye seen The beloved of my soul ? "
4 Scarce had I parted from them
When I found the beloved of my soul.
I held him and slacked not my hold,
Till I brought him home to my mother.'
5 I adjure you, ye maids of Jerusalem, By the roes and the hinds of the field, That ye rouse not love' nor awake her Until it be her good pleasure.
221
The Song of Songs
The Bridegroom's Procession
6 What is this that comes up from the desert Like columns of smoke,
Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, All scents of the merchant ?
7 Behold, it is Solomon's litter,
And round it three score valiant men3 Of the valiant of Israel,
8 Each with a sword in his hand, And acquainted with war—
Every man with a sword on his thigh
For the terrors of night.
9 The king* had a palanquin made him Of Lebanon wood.
10 Its feet he had fashioned of silver ; Its back was of gold.
Its seat was of purple : within It was inlaid with ebony.*
xi Come forth and look on the king,*
Ye daughters of Zion,
In the crown he received from his mother,
The day he was wedded
With gladness of heart.
In Praise of the Charms of the Bride
iv.
How fair, my love, art thou,
With thy dove-like eyes
Behind thy veil ;
And thy hair like a flock of goats
Streaming down from mount Gilead ;
222
The Song of Songs
2 Thy teeth like a flock new shorn Just come up from the washing, Ranged in a double row,
Not one of them lacking ;1
3 Thy lips like a scarlet thread, And thy mouth so lovely ;
Thy temples like pieces of pomegranate,
Seen through thy veil ;
4 Thy neck like the tower of David, Built for an armoury,4
Hung with the thousand shields, All shields of the valiant ;
5 Thy breasts like a pair of fawns That are twins of a roe 13
6 Till the day grow cool
And the shadows depart
I will go to the mountain of myrrh, And the hill of frankincense.'
7 0 my love, thou art fair altogether ; There is no spot in thee.
9 Thou6 hast ravished me, sisters and bride.
One glance of thine eyes hath bewitched me,
One glint of thy necklace.'
roa How sweet thy caress, sister bride I
rob How much better than wine thy caresses !
II Thy lips, 0 my bride, drip with honey, And milk lieth under thy tongue. Thy garments are fragrant as Lebanon ; ioc Thy perfumes are sweeter than balsam.
223
The Song of Songs
12 A garden enclosed is my sister,
A garden enclosed, a sealed fountain ;
13 Thy shoots are a pomegranate paradise—Choicest of fruits, Henna and spikenard,
14	Spikenard and saffron,
Calamus and cinnamon,
With all trees of incense, Aloes and myrrh,
With the chief spices all.
15 Thou art the fount of my garden, A well of fresh water,
Like streamlets of Lebanon.
16 0 North wind, awake, And come, thou South, And blow on my garden, That perfume be wafted.
" Leta my darling come into his garden And taste its choice fruits."
v.
I am come' to my garden, my sister ;
I gather me balsam and myrrh.
I have tasted the comb with the honey,
And drunk of my wine and my milk.
Taste ye, my friends, and drink ;
Yea, drink yourselves drunken, beloved.
In Praise of the Bridegroom The Bride tells her Tale
2 I slept, but my heart was awake.
0 hark ! my beloved is knocking.
224
The Song of Songs
" Open to me, my sister,
My dove, my beloved, all spotless.
For wet is my head with the dew,
And my locks with the drops of the night."
3 " P have laid my garment aside,
And why should I don it again ?
My feet, too, I have washed,
And why should I soil them again ? "
4 My love put his hand through the opening,' And moved was my heart for him.
5 So I rose to let in my darling :
My hands were dripping with myrrh, With the myrrh that ran over my fingers And on to the catch of the bolt.
6 I opened the door to my love,
But my darling had turned and was gone ; And the soul of me sank, when he vanished.4 I sought him, but all in vain :
I called, but he gave me no answer.
7 The watchmen were tramping the city ;
They met me, they beat me and wounded me. Those who kept watch on the walls
Seized the mantle that I had thrown over me.
8 I adjure you, ye maids of Jerusalem, If so be ye find my beloved,
What, then, shall ye tell my beloved ? That faint with love am I.
225
The Song of Songs
9 " What5 is thy darling more than another 0 thou of women the fairest ?
What is thy darling more than another,
That thou dost adjure us so ?"
The Bride's Praise of the Bridegroom
1o" My beloved is radiant and ruddy,
The chief among ten thousand.
iz His head is finest gold ;
His curls are as black as the raven.
12 His eyes are like doves
Over brooklets of water,
Or bathing in milk,
As they perch on the brink.6
13 His cheeks are like beds of spices, Like banks of sweet herbs. His lips are like lilies—adrip With their liquid myrrh.
14 His arms are like tapers of gold That are inlaid with jasper ;7 His belly like ivory wrought
And encrusted with sapphires.
15 His legs are like pillars of marble On sockets of gold.
He looks altogether like Lebanon, Grand as the cedars.
s6 Sweetness itself is his mouth ; He is all of him lovely.
Such is my love and my darling, Ye maids of Jerusalem."
226
The Song of Songs
Conclusion
vi.
" Whitherl hath gone thy beloved,
0 fairest of women ?
Whither hath turned thy beloved,
That with thee we may seek him ? "
2"My love is gone down to his garden, The terrace of spices,
To pasture his flock in his garden And gather the lilies.
3 My beloved is mine, I am his, 'Mong the lilies he pastures."
In Praise of the Bride
4 Thou art fair, my beloved, as Tirzah,2 Lovely as Jerusalem,
Dread as an army with banners.
5 Away from me turn those eyes That stir me so strangely, That hair like a flock of goats
Streaming down from mount Gilead,
6 Those teeth like a flock of ewes, Just come up from the washing, Ranged in a double row,
Not one of them lacking ;
7 Those temples like pieces of pomegranate Seen through thy veil.'
8 Three score queens had Solomon,' Concubines fourscore,
And maids without number.
9 But she, my dove, is but one,' She, my stainless, is one.
227	P 2
The Song of Songs
Alone and peerless is she
To the mother who bore her.
The daughters, at sight of her, praised her ; Concubines, queens, sang her praises.
io Who is this that looks forth like the dawn,
Fair as the moon, Clear as the sun,
And dread as an army with banners ?
II" I went downs to the garden of nuts,
To see the green shoots in the valley,
To see if the vines were in bud,
Or the pomegranates yet were in blossom.
12 Or ever I knew, on his chariot
The prince of my people had set me."'
13 Turn thee, turn, maid of Shulem,8
Turn thee, turn, that we sec thee.
But what would ye see in the Shulammite ? (We would see her dance) the war-dance!'
In Praise of the Bride as she dances the Sword-
Dance
vii.
How gracefully thou dost step
In thy sandals, thou prince's daughter !
The curves of thy thighs are like jewels,
Wrought by the hands of an artist.
2 Thy waist' is a rounded bowl—
Be never the sweet wine wanting. Thy belly a heap of wheat, That is set about with lilies.
228
The Song of Songs
3 Thy breasts like a pair of fawns That are twins of a gazelle,
4 Thy neck like the ivory tower. Thine eyes are like Heshbon's pools, By the gate of the populous city,2
Thy nose like the tower of Lebanon
That looketh toward Damascus,
5 Thy head is like Carmel upon thee,
Thy flowing locks are as purple : Thy tresses hold captive the king.
6 How fair, my beloved, art thou ! How lovely in love's delights
7 Thou art slender and tall as a palm, And thy breasts are like its clusters.
8 I vowed I would climb this palm,
And take hold of the branches thereof. 0 let thy breasts be as clusters,
The smell of thy breath be as apples,
9 Thy lips3 be as wine of the best, That goeth down smoothly
And glides o'er the lips and the teeth.'
The Bride's Longing
io I am my darling's ;
He longeth for me.
it Come, then, my love,
Let us go to the fields,
Let us lodge among the henna.5
12 And early we'll hie to the vineyards, To see if the vine be in bud,
229
The Song of Songs
If its blossoms have opened, And pomegranates flower ;
And there my caresses I'll give thee.
13 The love-apples give forth their scent ; At our door are all manner of fruits, Precious fruits, both new and old,
That I stored up for thee, my beloved.
viii.
0 that thou wert my brother,
That nursed at the breasts of my mother ! If I found thee without, I would kiss thee, Nor fear the contempt of another.
2 To my mother's house I would bring thee,
To the chamber of her that conceived me.' Spiced wine would I give thee to drink, A draught of my pomegranate wine.2
The Incomparable Power of Love
5 Who is this that comes up from the wilderness,' Leaning upon her beloved ?
" 'Neath the apple-tree yonder I woke thee,'
Just there, where a babe thou wast swaddledsYes, there—by the mother that bore thee."
6" Set me as seal' on thy heart Like the ring on thy hand.
For love is strong as death,
Its passions is fierce' as the grave ; 's
Its flashes are flashes of fire,
Its flames are like the lightning."
23o
The Song of Songs
7 No waters can quench it, Nor floods overwhelm it.
If a man should give all in his house for it,
Utterly scorned would he be.
The Bride's Proud Reply to her Brothers
8"A sister have we,12 but she's little—
No breasts hath she yet.
What then shall we do with our sister,
The day she is spoken for ?
9 If she should prove a wall,
We will build her a turret of silver."
But if she should prove a door,
We will fence her with boards of cedar.""
10 " I was a wall,
My breasts were the turrets ;15 And he," as he looked at me, Won me my happiness."
The Two Vineyards
11 Solomon17 had a vineyard at Baal-hamonHe let out the vineyard to keepers ;
And each man brought in for the fruit thereof One thousand shekels of silver.
12 I, too, have a vineyard,18 mine own :
I leave thee the thousand, 0 Solomon ;
Yea, and two hundred besides
For the men who kept watch on the fruit
thereof.
231
The Song of Songs
Conclusion
13" 0 thou that hauntest the gardens," My comrades are all attention : Come, let us hear thy voice."20
Li." Hasten, beloved,
And fleen like the roe
Or the playful gazelle
On the mountains of spices."
