\ms PROPHECIES CONCERNING JUDAH AND ISRAEL (i.-xii.) 

\ms2 Jerusalem: Her Present Sin and Punishment; Her Future Redemption and Glory 

\c 1

\p \v 1 The vision of Judah and Jerusalem, as seen by Isaiah the son of Amoz, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. 

\s The Prophet's Lament over the Unfaithfulness of the People to their God 

2 Hear, ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, 
    For Jehovah Himself is the Speaker. 
"Sons have I reared and brought up, 
    But rebellious to Me are they grown. 
3 An ox knoweth its owner, 
    And an ass its master's crib ; 
But Israel doth not know, 
    My people doth not consider." 

4 Ah! sinful nation, 
    Ye people laden with guilt, 
Ye brood of evil-doers, 
    Ye children all corrupt, 
That have forsaken Jehovah, 
    And spurned the Holy One of Israel;
5 Why would ye court more stripes 
    By straying yet further from Him ? 
The head is sick altogether, 
    The heart is all diseased. 
6 From the sole of the foot to the head 
    There is no soundness therein : 
Nought but bruises and weals 
    And wounds that are raw and bleeding, 
All unpressed and unbandaged, 
    All unsoftened with oil. 

7 Your land is a desolation, 
    Your cities are burned with fire ; 
The fields before your eyes 
    Are being devoured by aliens. 
8 And the daughter of Zion is left 
    All alone like a booth in a vineyard, 
A lodge in a cucumber-field, 
    Or a turret where men keep watch. 
9 Were it not that Jehovah of Hosts 
    Had left us a remnant, 
Our fate had been wellnigh like Sodom's, 
    Or like to Gomorrah's. 

\s The Futility of a Merely Ceremonial Worship 

10 Give ear to the word of Jehovah, 
    Ye rulers of Sodom ; 
And hear what our God hath to teach you, 
    Ye folk of Gomorrah. 
11 Jehovah saith, " What care I 
    For your multiplied sacrifice ? 
I am sick of burnt offerings of rams 
    And the fat of fed beasts ; 
Blood of bullocks, of lambs, or of goats, 
    Is no pleasure to Me. 
12 When ye gather to gaze on My face, 
    Who hath asked you for these things ? 
Trample My courts no more, 
    13 Bring offerings no more. 
Vain is the smoke of sacrifice, 
    To Me 'tis abomination. 
The new moon and sabbath, 
    The call to assembly, 
The fast and the festival 
    I cannot (endure). 
14 They weigh Me down, 
    I am tired of the burden. 

15 When therefore ye spread out your hands, 
    I will hide from you Mine eyes ; 
When ye make your many prayers, 
    I will not listen to you. 
16 Your hands are full of blood : 
    Wash, and make you clean. 
Banish out of My sight 
    The wicked things that ye do. 
Cease to do evil, 
    17 Learn to do well. 
Let justice be ever your care, 
    Punish the man of violence, 
Win for the orphan his rights, 
    And defend the cause of the widow." 

\s The Great Alternatives 

18 " Come," saith Jehovah, "and now 
    Let us reason together. 
Your sins, though like scarlet, may yet 
    Become white as the snow. 
And though they be crimson-red, 
    They may yet be as wool. 
19 If ye be obedient and willing, 
    Ye shall taste the good of the land ; 
20 But if ye refuse and rebel, 
    'Tis the sword ye shall taste : 
    For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it." 

\s Zion's Present Shame and Future Glory 

21 Alas ! how the once faithful City 
    Hath turned to be harlot. 
She that was once full of justice, 
    She wherein righteousness lodged, 
    Is now haunted by murderers. 
22 Thy silver is now become dross, 
    And thy wine mixed with water. 
23 Thy rulers are grown to be rebels, 
    The comrades of thieves 
Every man of them fond of his bribe, 
    Hunting ever for gifts, 
Caring nought for the rights of the orphan 
    Or the cause of the widow. 

24 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, 
    The Mighty One of Israel : 
" From Mine enemies who resist Me, 
    I will get Me the comfort of vengeance. 
25 I will turn My hand against thee ; 
I will smelt out thy dross in the furnace, 
    And all thine alloy remove. 

26 Judges, like those of old, 
    And counsellors as of yore, I will give thee. 
Thereafter shalt thou be called 
    The City of Justice, the Faithful City. 

27 By justice shall Zion be ransomed, 
    And by righteousness her people.
28 But together shall rebels and sinners be crushed, 
    And those that abandon Jehovah shall perish. 

\w The Heathen Cult and its Doom 

29 For the trees ye delight in shall bring you to shame, 
    And abashed shall ye be for your gardens beloved. 
30 Like a tree with withered leaves 
    Shall ye be like a waterless garden. 
31 Like tow shall the strong man become, 
    And the thing he hath wrought like a spark ; 
And both shall burn together 
    In a flame that cannot be quenched. 

\s Jerusalem the Centre of Blessing to the World ;  Arbitration, Disarmament, and International Peace 

\p \v 1 The message of Isaiah the son of Amoz : his 
vision of Judah and Jerusalem. 

2 In the after-time it shall be 
    That the mountain of Jehovah 
Shall be set at the head of the mountains, 
    And exalted above the hills. 
All peoples shall thither stream, 
    3 Many nations shall go and say, 
" Come, let us go to the mount of Jehovah, 
    To the house of the God of Jacob. 
That He in His ways may instruct us, 
    And that we in His paths may walk. 
For instruction proceedeth from Zion, 
    The word of Jehovah from Jerusalem." 
4. He will judge the disputes of the peoples, 
    And for manifold nations so justly will arbitrate 
That their swords they will beat into ploughshares, 
    And to pruning-hooks their spears. 
Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, 
    And war they shall learn no more. 

5 O household of Jacob, come, 
    Let us walk in the light of Jehovah. 

\ms2 Judgment upon the Wealth and Pride of Judah 

\s Jehovah's Judgment-Day 

6 (Get ye into the caves of the rocks, 
    And hide in the holes of the ground, 
From Jehovah's dread face, when in glory majestic 
    He riseth --- with terror to smite the earth.) 
For He hath forsaken His people, 
    The household of Jacob. 

Filled is his land from the east with diviners,
    With soothsayers like to the Philistines, 
    Sorcerers, children of aliens. 
7 Filled is his land full of silver and gold, 
    And his treasure is endless. 
Filled is his land full of horses, 
    His chariots are endless. 
8 Filled is his land full of idols, 
    He worships the work of his hands, 
    The things that his fingers have made. 

11 So the pride of men shall be humbled, 
    Laid low shall man's loftiness be, 
    And that day shall Jehovah alone be exulted. 
10 Get ye into the rocks, 
    And hide in the ground, 
From Jehovah's dread presence 
    And glory majestic. 

12 For a day of Jehovah is coming 
    Upon all that is haughty and proud, 
    Upon all that is lofty and high 
13 Upon cedars of Lebanon all, 
    And oaks of Bashan all, 
14 Upon all the great mountains 
    And all the high hills, 
15 Upon all the proud towers, 
    All fortified walls, 
16 Upon all ships of Tarshish 
    And all gallant craft.

17 Then the pride of men shall be humbled, 
    Laid low shall man's loftiness be, 
    And that day shall Jehovah alone be exalted, 
18 The idols shall all of them vanish. 
19 Get ye into the caves of the rocks, 
    And the holes of the ground 
From Jehovah's dread face, when in glory majestic 
    He riseth --- with terror to smite the earth. 

20 That day shall men cast away 
    To the moles and to the bats 
Their idols of silver and gold, 
    Which they made for themselves to worship ; 
21 And into the caves of the rocks they shall get them, 
    And into the rents of the cliffs, 
From Jehovah's dread face, when in glory majestic 
    He riseth with terror to smite the earth. 

\p \v 22 Oh cease your trust in man, in whose nostrils is but a breath: of what account is he?

\c 3
\s A Reign of Anarchy 

1 Behold, the Lord Jehovah of Hosts 
    Taketh staff and stay from Jerusalem and Judah --- 
2 Soldiers and warriors, judges and prophets, 
    3 Diviners and elders, and captains of fifty, 
Men of distinction, and men of sage counsel, 
    Cunning magicians and skilful enchanters. 
4 And boys I will give them for princes, 
    And men of caprice shall rule over them. 
5 The people shall play the tyrant, 
    Each man over his neighbour. 
The young shall be rude to the aged, 
    The man of low rank to the high. 

6 One shall take hold of his fellow, and say to him : 
" Your family has a robe ; 
Come, and do you be our ruler, 
    And take this ruin in hand." 
7 Then will the other protest, 
" Nay, verily : I cannot heal you. 
In my own house there is no bread, 
    Nor yet is there a robe. 
Ye shall not thrust upon me 
    The leadership of the people." 

8 Jerusalem is stumbling to ruin, 
    And Judah must surely fall ; 
For by word and by deed they defy Jehovah, 
    Provoking those glorious eyes of His. 
9 Their respecting of persons is witness against them ; 
    Like Sodom they publish their sin undisguisedly. 
    Woe unto them ! They have wrought their own ruin. 
10 Happy the righteous ! for well they shall fare, 
    They shall reap the fruit of their doings. 
11 But woe to the wicked ! for ill they shall fare, 
    Their deeds shall be recompensed unto them. 

12 My people are cruelly governed, 
    Extortioners rule over them. 
O My people, thy leaders mislead, 
    And confuse the way thou shouldst go. 
13 Jehovah is taking His place for the trial, 
    He standeth to judge His people.
14 Jehovah doth summon to judgment 
    The elders and princes of His people. 
"Yes, you have devoured the vineyard, 
    The spoil of the poor is in your houses. 
15 What mean ye by crushing My people 
    And grinding the faces of the poor ?" 
    Saith the Lord Jehovah of Hosts. 

\s The Doom of the Haughty Women 

16 Moreover Jehovah said : 
" Because Zion's daughters are haughty, 
Walking with heads held high, 
    And eyes for ever ogling, 
With dainty little steps, 
    And anklets ever jingling, 
17 The Lord shall smite with a scab 
    The head of the daughters of Zion, 
    And their shame shall Jehovah lay bare 
18 That day the Lord will remove 
    The finery of the anklets, 
The net-bands and the moons, 
    19 The ear-drops and bracelets and veils, 
20 The head-dresses, armlets, and sashes, 
    The perfume-boxes and amulets, 
    21 The signet-rings and the nose-rings, 
22 The state-gowns, the mantles, the shawls, and the satchels, 
    23 The gauzes and linens, the turbans and veils. 

24 Sweet scents shall give place unto stench, 
    And the girdle be changed for a rope. 
And well-set hair shall be bald, 
    And for elegant robe shall be sackcloth, 
    For beauty the brand (of a slave). 
25 Thy liegemen shall fall by the sword, 
    And thy mighty men in the battle. 
26 Her gates shall lament and mourn, 
    As she sitteth despoiled on the ground. 
\q \c 4 \v 1 That day shall seven women 
    Take hold of one man and say, 
" Our own bread will we eat, 
    And our raiment will we wear ; 
But oh, let us bear thy name, 
    And take our reproach away." 

\s Zion's Final Glory 

2 In that day 
Shall the wild vegetation be glorious and fair, 
And the fruit of the tilled land majestic and comely 
    For Israel's sons that escape. 
3 And those that remain in Zion, 
    And those that are left in Jerusalem, 
Shall be called by the name of holy 
    All who stand in the book of life. 
4 When the Lord shall have washed away 
    The filth of the daughters of Zion, 
And rinsed away from her midst 
    The blood-stains of Jerusalem, 
By means of the blast of judgment, 
    The blast of extermination, 
5 Then will Jehovah come, 
    And o'er the whole site of mount Zion 
And over her convocations 
    Shall appear in a cloud by day, 
And by the night in smoke 
    And the brightness of flaming fire ; 
And over all the glory 
    6 Shall cover and canopy be 
A shade by day from the heat, 
    A refuge and shelter from storm and rain. 

\ms2 The Vineyard with the Wild Grapes 

\s The Song of the Vineyard 

\q \c 5 \v 1 A song will I sing of my friend, 
    A love-song touching his vineyard. 
A vineyard belonged to my friend, 
    On a fertile hill-top he had set it. 
2 He had digged it and cleared it of stones, 
    And choice vines therein he had planted. 
A tower he had built in the midst, 
    And a winepress therein he had hewn. 
Then he looked for a yield of good grapes, 
    But the grapes that it yielded were wild. 

3 Now judge, ye that dwell in Jerusalem, 
    And ye that are freemen of Judah, 
    Judge between me and my vineyard. 
4 What more could I do for my vineyard 
    That I had neglected to do ? 
And why, when I looked for good grapes, 
    Did it yield only grapes that were wild ? 

5 So now let me give you to know 
    What I purpose to do to my vineyard. 
I will tear off its hedge, that the beasts may devour it ; 
    I will break through its wall, that they trample it down. 
6 I will make it a waste, all unpruned and unweeded, 
    With thorns and with briars overgrown shall it be, 
And the clouds I will charge to withhold from it rain. 

7 For the vineyard of Jehovah of Hosts is the household of Israel, 
    The freemen of Judah His cherished plantation. 
But instead of the justice He looked for was bloodshed, 
    Instead of the right was the cry (of the wronged). 

\s The National Sins : Woe ! 

8 Woe unto you who join house unto house 
    And who add one field to another, 
Till no one has room but you, 
    And ye settle the laud by yourselves. 

9 Jehovah of Hosts in mine ear hath whispered, 
Surely many a great fine house 
    Shall be desolate and empty, 
10 For ten acres of vineyard shall yield but eight gallons, 
    And the harvest shall be but one tenth 4 of the seed. 

11 Woe unto them that rise early 
    To give themselves to drink, 
And to those that sit late in the evening, 
    Inflaming themselves with wine ; 
12 Whose banquets of wine are enlivened 
    With lute, harp, timbrel, and flute ; 
But all blind to the work of Jehovah, 
    They see not the things He is doing. 
13 Therefore all unaware shall My people 
    Be swept into exile afar 
Their noblemen dying of hunger, 
    Their populace parched with thirst. 

14 Therefore Sheol with ravenous throat 
    Opens wide her jaws without measure. 
And down shall her splendour go, 
    And her noisy tumultuous rabble, 
    With all that in her was exultant. 
17 And there shall lambs graze as at pasture, 
    And failings shall feed in her ruins. 
16 Thus through judgment Jehovah of Hosts is exalted, 
    The holy God shows Himself holy by righteousness. 

18 Woe unto those that draw penalty on 
    By their sin, as by stout wagon-ropes drawn by oxen ; 
19 That say, " Let Him haste, let Him act with speed, 
    In order that we may see it ; 
Let the purpose of Israel's Holy One come 
    So near that we recognize it." 

20 Woe unto those that call evil good, 
    And good evil ; 
To those that turn light into darkness, 
    And darkness to light ; 
To those that turn sweet into bitter, 
    And bitter to sweet. 

21 Woe unto those that esteem themselves wise, 
    And that fancy themselves to be prudent. 

22 Woe unto those that are valiant in wine-drinking, 
    Warriors brave at the mingling of drink ; 
23 Whom a bribe will induce to acquit the guilty, 
    And innocent men to deprive of their rights. 

24 As fire licks up the stubble, 
    And hay is shrivelled in flame, 
So their root shall turn to rottenness, 
    And their blossom go up in dust ; 
Because they rejected Jehovah's instruction, 
    And the message of Israel's Holy One scorned. 

\s A Foreign Army is Coming 

25 So against His people His anger was kindled, 
    Against them He stretched forth His hand and He smote them; 
The mountains shook, and the dead 
    Lay like refuse about the streets. 

For all this His anger is not turned back, 
    But His hand is stretched out still. 

26 To a far-distant nation He raises His signal, 
    And whistles for them from the end of the earth. 
See ! hastily, swiftly they come 
27 None weary, none stumbling among them, 
    Unsleeping and slumbering never : 
The band of their loins never loosed, 
    The thong of their shoes never torn. 
28 Their arrows are sharp, 
    And their bows are all bent : 
The hoofs of their horses are counted as flint, 
    And their wheels as the whirlwind. 
29 Their roar is like that of a lioness, 
    And like the young lions they roar, 
Growling and seizing the prey, 
    And bearing it far beyond rescue. 
30 That day they shall roar over him, 
    With a roar like the roar of the sea: 
When he looks on the earth, behold ! darkness, 
    The light has grown dark in the clouds. 

\ms2 The Prophet's Call 

\p \c 6 \v 1 In the year that King Uzziah died, I had a vision 
of the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne, and \v 2 the skirts of His robe filled the Temple. Before Him were standing seraphs, each with six wings two for covering the face, two the loins, and two \v 3 to fly with ; and thus they kept calling to one another : 

\q " Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of Hosts ; 
\q2 The whole earth is filled with His glory." 

\nb \v 4 At the sound of their calling the foundations of the threshold shook, and the House began to fill \v 5 with smoke. Then I said 

\q Woe is me, for I am undone ; 
\q For a man of unclean lips am I, 
\q2 And I dwell in a nation of unclean lips ; 
\q And yet mine eyes have seen 
\q2 The King, Jehovah of Hosts." 

\nb \v 6 Then one of the seraphs flew to me with a live coal in his hand, which with tongs he had taken \v 7 from off the altar. With this he touched my mouth, and said, 

\q " See, this hath touched thy lips : 
\q2 Thy guilt is past and thy sin forgiven." 

\nb 8 Then I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, " Whom shall I send ? who will go for us ?" And I said, " Here am I, send me." \v 9 Then He said, 

\q " Go and say to this people 
\q ' Hear ever, but understand never ; 
\q2 See ever, but comprehend never.' 
\q \v 10 Make thou the heart of this people callous, 
\q2 Dull thou their ears and besmear their eyes, 
\q Lest they see with their eyes, 
\q2 lest they hear with their ears, 
\q And their heart understand, 
\q2 and their health come again." 

\nb \v 11 Then I said, " O Lord, how long ?" And He said, 

\q " Till cities lie wasted, 
    \q2 With not an inhabitant left ; 
\q Till houses hold men no more, 
    \q2 And the land is left a desolation ; 
\q \v 12 Till Jehovah removes men afar 
    \q2 And wide tracts of the land lie forsaken. 
\q \v 13 And should there be in it a tenth still left, 
    \q2 That too, in its turn, must be given to the tire, 
    \q2 Like the stump of an oak or a terebinth felled."

\ms2 The Crisis Created by the Menace to Judah in 735 B.C. 

\s The Prophet's Word to the Terrified King 

\c 7 

\p \v 1 In the days of Ahaz, the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, Rezin King of Aram, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, King of Israel, marched against Jerusalem to attack it : but they were unable to develop an actual assault upon it. 

\p \v 2 When news reached the Court that the Aramean army was on Ephraimite soil, the heart of Ahaz and his people shook like forest-trees before the \v 3 wind. Then Jehovah said to Isaiah, "Go out --- thou and thy son Shear-yashub --- to meet Ahaz at the end of the conduit of the upper pool on the \v 4 Fuller's Field Road, and say to him : Be careful to keep calm : be not faint-hearted or afraid of this pair of fire-brands that are nothing but smoking stumps. Be not afraid of the fierce anger of Rezin \v 5 and Aram and the son of Remaliah. Aram and 
Ephraim with the son of Remaliah have indeed \v 6 plotted thy ruin : their purpose is to invade Judah, and, after reducing her to straits, to break into (Jerusalem) ; then, having overpowered her, they propose to set the son of Tabeel on the throne. 

\p \v 7 But thus saith the Lord Jehovah : 

' This thing shall not succeed, 
    It shall not come to pass. 
8 For the head of Aram is Damascus, 
    And the head of Damascus is Rezin ; 
9 The head of Ephraim is Samaria, 
    And the head of Samaria is the son of Remaliah. 
Your faith must firmly hold, 
    If ye would yourselves be held.' "

\s The Great Refusal and the Sign 

10 Once more I addressed Ahaz thus, " Ask Jehovah \v 11 your God for a sign ask it (if you like) either from the depths of the under-world or from the heights \v 12 above." " No," replied Ahaz, " I will not ask for one : that would be equivalent to submitting Jehovah to a test." \v 13 Then I said, " Hear then, ye household of David. Is it not enough for you to weary mortal men that ye must weary my God as well ? \v 14 You shall have a sign therefore from the Lord Himself. Behold ! 

A maid is with child, she shall bring forth a son, 
    And shall call his name Immanuel.
15 Honey and curd shall he eat, 
    When he knows how to choose what is good, 
    And to shun what is evil. 
16 For ere the child shall know 
    How to choose what is good 
    And to shun what is evil, 
That land shall be deserted 
    Whose two kings thou so dreadest. 

\s Judah shall also be Ravaged 

17 Jehovah shall bring upon thee and thy people 
    And on thy father's house 
Such days as have never yet been, 
    Since Ephraim departed from Judah.
18 That day it shall come to pass 
That Jehovah shall whistle for the flies and the bees. 
    19 They shall come every one, and then down they shall settle 
In the steep-walled ravines and in clefts of the rocks, 
    And on all thorn-hedges and places of pasture. 
20 That day shall the Lord shave bare 
    With a razor that is hired 
    In the land beyond the River
Both the head and hidden hair ; 
    And the beard too shall be snipped. 
21 And in that day shall a man 
    Keep but two sheep and a cow ; 
22 Yet the plenteous yield of milk 
    Shall supply him fare of curd. 
For the fare of every man 
    That is left upon the land 
    Shall be nought but curd and honey. 
23 And in that day every spot 
    Where were once a thousand vines, 
Worth a thousand silver pieces,
    Shall with thorns and briers be covered. 
24 With bow and with arrow shall men come thither, 
    For all the land shall be thorns and briers. 
25 Fear of thorns and briers shall hold men afar 
    From the hills that used to be hoed with the hoe. 
    There cattle shall wander and sheep shall tread. 

\s The Fall of Damascus and Samaria 
\c 8

\p \v 1 Jehovah said to me, " Take a large tablet, and 
write upon it in the common script ' Speed-spoil \v 2 Hurry-prey ; ' and take (two) reliable witnesses, \v 3 Uriah the priest and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah." Then after the prophetess, through my approach to her, had conceived and borne a son, Jehovah said to me, " Call his name Speed-spoil 
Hurry-prey. 

4 For ere the child shall know 
    How to cry ' My father ! My mother !' 
The wealth of Damascus, the spoil of Samaria, 
    Shall be carried away to the king of Assyria." 

\s The Invasion of Judah 

\p \v 5 Once more I had a message from Jehovah it was this: 

6 "Because this people hath spurned 
    The gentle stream of Shiloah, 
And melt with fear of Rezin 
    And the son of Remaliah, 
7 Therefore, behold, the Lord 
    Will speedily bring upon them 
The waters of the River,
    The great and mighty River. 
It shall rise above all its channels, 
    And overflow all its banks. 
8 On it shall sweep over Judah, 
    An overflowing flood 
    That shall reach as high as the neck." 
But (Jehovah's) 6 outstretched wings 
    Shall cover the breadth of the land ; 
    For with us is God. 

\s The Futility of Opposition to Judah 

9 Ye may storm as ye will, ye nations, 
    Ye all shall be shattered. 
All ye far-distant lands 
    Of the earth, give ear. 
Ye may gird yourselves for the fray, 
    But ye all shall be shattered. 
10 Ye may forge your plans as ye will, 
    They shall all be confounded. 
Be your resolves what they will, 
    They shall not be accomplished ; 
    For with us is God. 

\s None is to be Feared but Jehovah 

\p \v 11 These were Jehovah's words to me, as He grasped me with His hand and warned me not to walk in the ways of the people : 

12 "Call ye not all a conspiracy 
    That this people calleth conspiracy. 
    Share not their fears and their dreads. 
13 But Jehovah of Hosts --- it is He 
    Ye should count as the great Conspirator.
    Let Him be your fear and your dread. 
14 A stone and a rock He shall prove, whereon 
    Both houses of Israel shall strike and stumble - 
    A trap and a snare to the folk of Jerusalem. 
15 Many among them shall stumble and fall, 
    Shall be broken and snared and taken. 

\s Isaiah's Patient Hope 

\p \v 16 I will seal my teaching and fasten my message \v 17 in (the heart of) my disciples. I will patiently wait for Jehovah who hideth His face from the \v 18 household of Israel ; I will set my hope in Him. I myself and the children Jehovah has given me are in Israel as signs and symbols from Jehovah of Hosts whose home is on Mount Zion. 

\s The Awful Plight of Unbelieving Judah 

\p \v 19 When they tell you to have recourse to ghosts and familiar spirits that chirp and mutter, ask them if a nation should not rather have recourse to its God. Why should they consult the dead on behalf \v 20 of the living ? Assuredly they shall (one day) clamour for the teaching and the message, when there is no day-break for them any more. 

21 They shall range through the land sore pressed and hungry,       And hunger shall drive them to rage. 
    They shall curse their king and their God. 
22 They shall lift up their eyes to the heavens above, 
    They shall look to the earth beneath ; 
But nought shall they see save distress and anguish, 
    And thick impenetrable gloom. 

\s The Great Deliverance and the Glorious King 

\p \c 9 \v 1 In the former time He brought the territory of Zebulon and Naphtali a into contempt, but in the latter time hath He covered with glory the ground held by the nations beyond the Jordan on the way to the sea. 

2 The people that walked in darkness 
    Have seen a glorious light : 
Those that dwelt in the land of gloom 
    On them the light hath shone. 
3 Thou hast multiplied their gladness 5 
    And given them great joy : 

The joy they made in Thy presence 
    Was like the joy of harvest ; 
Their gladness was like the gladness 
    Of men who divide the spoil. 

4 For the yoke that pressed so heavy, 
    And the bar upon their shoulders, 
And the rod of their taskmasters, 
    Thou hast broken as on Midian's day. 

5 Every boot of thundering warrior, 
    Every war-cloak drenched with blood, 
Is destined for the burning, 
    Shall be fuel for the fire. 

6 For to us a child is born, 
    Unto us a son is given, 
On whose shoulder is dominion ; 
    And this is the name he bears ---

" Counsellor most wonderful, 
    God with the warrior might, 
Father everlasting, 
    Prince of the reign of peace." 

7 Great is the dominion 
    And endless is the peace, 
Upon the throne of David, 
    And over all his realm : 

To establish and uphold it 
    In righteousness and justice 
From henceforth and for ever. 
    The zeal of Jehovah of Hosts 
    Shall bring this thing to pass. 

\ms2 The Doom of Israel 

8 The Lord sent a word into Jacob, 
    On Israel it shall alight 
9 With a power all the people shall feel 
    In Ephraim and in Samaria. 
They have stiffened their neck in pride,
    In their stoutness of heart they have said : 
10 "The bricks are fallen down, 
    But now we will build with hewn stone. 
The sycomores are cut down, 
    But with cedars we will replace them." 
11 So against them Jehovah hath stirred up their foes, 
    He hath spurred their enemies on ; 
12 Syrians east, and Philistines west, 
    Have with open mouth devoured Israel. 
Yet for all this His anger is not turned back, 
    But His hand is stretched out still. 

13 But the people turned not unto Him that smote them, 
    Nor did they resort to Jehovah of Hosts. 
14 So He cut off from Israel head and tail, 
    Palm-branch and rush in a single day. 
15 The elders and men of repute are the head, 
    And the prophets whose teaching is false are the tail. 
16 Those who should lead this people mislead them, 
    And those whom they ought to have led are destroyed.
17 The Lord will therefore not spare their youths, 
    On their orphans and widows He taketh no pity; 
For each and all are profane and wicked, 
    And every mouth speaketh impious folly. 
Yet for all this His anger is not turned back, 
    But His hand is stretched out still. 

18 For wickedness blazed like a fire 
    That devoureth first thorns and briers, 
Then sets forest thickets aflame, 
    Till they roll in columns of smoke. 
19 By the breath of Jehovah the land was scorched, 
     The people became like cannibals. 
20 They carved on the right, yet were hungry, 
    Devoured on the left, unappeased ;  
No man did pity his fellow, 
    20 But each ate the flesh of his neighbour ---
21 Manasseh, Ephraim ; and Ephraim, Manasseh ; 
    And both against Judah together. 
Yet for all this His anger is not turned back, 
    But His hand is stretched out still. 

\c 10

1 Woe unto those that give mischievous verdicts, 
    Elaborate scrolls that bring sorrow, 
2 By robbing the weak of their rights 
    And by plundering the poor of their due, 
So that widows become their spoil, 
    And orphans fall a prey. 
3 But what will ye do in the Day of Assize 
    Which will come like a crash from afar ? 
To whom will ye flee for help, 
    And where will ye leave your abundance, 
4 That ye crouch not under the prisoners
    Or fall among the slain ? 
Yet for all this His anger is not turned 
    But His hand is stretched out still. 

\ms2 The Doom of Assyria 

\s The Two Plans --- Assyria's and Jehovah's 

5 Ho ! Assyria ! Rod of mine anger,
    And staff of Mine indignation ! 
6 Against an impious people I send him, 
    A nation that sore hath provoked Me to wrath ; 
And I solemnly charge him to spoil and to plunder 
    And trample them down like the mire of the streets. 
7 Not such, however, his fancy, 
    Nor such the thought of his heart ; 
But his thought is the utter destruction 
    Of nations not a few. 

8 "Are my captains," he says, " not all kings ? 
    9 Is not Calno's fate like Carchemish, 
And Hamath's fate like Arpad's, 
    And Samaria's like Damascus ?  
10 My hand hath seized those kingdoms 
    With images more than Jerusalem's ; 
11 And shall I not do to Jerusalem 
    And to her images also, 
As I have done to Samaria 
    And to her idols also ? 

\p \v 12 When 7 the Lord hath accomplished all His work on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, He will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria and the glory of \v 13 his lofty looks. For he hath said, 

By the strength of my hand have I done it, 
    And by my cunning discernment, 
Removing the bounds of the nations, 
    And plundering their treasures. 
I have brought down cities to ashes, 
    To dust those that dwell therein.
14 I thrust my hand in the wealth 
    Of the nations, as into a nest ; 
And all the earth have I gathered 
    As one gathers eggs that are left : 
There was not a wing that fluttered, 
    None opened the mouth or chirped." 

15 Shall an axe boast over the man that wields it, 
    Or saw treat with insolence him that doth handle it? 
As if ever a rod could swing him that doth lift it, 
    Or staff of wood could brandish a man ! 

The Fate of Assyria and Judah 

\c 16 So into his fat shall the Lord 
    Jehovah of Hosts send leanness, 
And under his splendour a burning 
    Shall burn like the burning of fire. 
17 That flaming fire is the Holy One, 
    He that is Israel's Light ; 
It shall blaze and devour his thorns 
    And his briers in a single day. 
18 His glorious forest and gardens 
    Shall vanish, body and soul, 
    Like a sick man pining away ; 
19 And his forest trees that are left 
    Shall be few, that a child may record them. 

20 That day it shall come to pass, 
    That no more shall the remnant of Jacob 
Or those that escape of the household of Israel 
    Lean upon him 10 that smote them : 
They shall loyally lean on Jehovah, 
    The Holy One of Israel. 
21 A remnant shall return, 
    Even a remnant of Jacob, 
    Unto the mighty God. 
22 For though thy people, O Israel, 
    Be even as the sand of the sea, 
    But a remnant of them shall return. 
Destruction is decreed, 
    Breaking in like a flood of judgment. 
23 For destruction, fixed and final, 
    Jehovah of Hosts will accomplish 
    In the midst of all the earth. 

\s The Consolation of Zion : Assyria will assuredly fall 

24 Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah, 
" Ye My people who dwell in Zion, 
Be not afraid of Assyria, 
    Who smiteth thee with the sword, 
And lifteth his staff against thee 
    As Egypt did of old. 
25 For yet a little while, 
    My fury will be spent, 
    And Mine anger shall have an end. 
26 Over him shall Jehovah brandish 
    A scourge like that which smote 
    Upon Midian at Raven's Rock. 
And that rod of His over the sea 
    He will lift it up once more 
    As He did against Egypt of old. 
27 His burden shall pass from thy shoulder, 
    His yoke press thy neck no more. 
From Rimmon he hath gone up 
    28 He hath come as far as Ai, 
Through Migron he hath passed, 
    He hath stored his baggage at Mich mash, 
29 He hath gone across the pass, 
    He hath bivouacked in Geba. 
Ramah is all a-tremble, 
    Gibeah of Saul is in flight. 
30 Ye people of Gallim, shriek ; 
    Listen, O Laishah ; 
Answer her, Anathoth ; 
    31 Madmenah taketh to flight. 
The people of Gebira seek refuge. 
    32 This day he will halt at Nob. 
He shaketh his fist against 
    The Mount of the daughter of Zion, 
    The hill of Jerusalem. 

33 But see ! the Lord Jehovah of Hosts 
    Is lopping the branches with fearful crash ; 
    And those that were lofty are now laid low. 
34 He strikes with His axe the wild thickets away, 
    And Lebanon's glorious cedars are fallen. 

\ms2 The Bliss of Israel in the Latter Days 

\s The Messianic King and Kingdom 

\c 11 

1 There shall come forth a shoot from the stock of Jesse, 
    And out of his roots shall a branch sprout forth. 
2 Jehovah's own spirit shall rest upon him 
    The spirit of wisdom and insight, 
The spirit of counsel and might, 
    Of the knowledge and fear of Jehovah. 
3 He will not judge after the sight of his eyes, 
    Nor decide by the words that are poured in his ears ; 
4 But with justice shall he deal with the cause of the helpless, 
    The case of the poor he will settle with equity. 
With the rod of his mouth he will smite the tyrant, 
    And slay the unjust with the breath of his lips. 
5 His loins shall be girt with the girdle of justice, 
    His waist shall be bound with the circlet of faithfulness. 

6 The wolf shall lodge with the lamb, 
    And the leopard lie down with the kid ; 
And the calf and the lion together shall graze, 
    And a little child shall lead them. 
7 The cow and the bear shall be friends,   
    And their young ones shall lie down together, 
    The lion shall eat straw like the ox. 
8 The suckling shall play o'er the hole of the asp, 
    And the weaned child trot in the lair of the viper. 
9 None shall do hurt or havoc 
    On all My holy mountain : 
For then shall the earth be filled 
    With the knowledge of Jehovah, 
    As the waters cover the sea. 

\s The Triumphant Return 

10 That day it shall come to pass, 
That the Root of Jesse who standeth 
    As ensign to the peoples ---
To him shall the nations resort, 
    And his resting-place shall be glorious. 
11 That day it shall come to pass 
    That the Lord shall again lift His hand 
To recover the rest of His folk 
    That are left in Assyria and Egypt, 
In Pathros, in Cush, and in Elam, 
    In Shinar and Hamath and lands by the sea.
12 He will raise for the nations a signal, 
    And gather the outcasts of Israel, 
And Judah's dispersed shall assemble 
    From all the four corners of earth. 

13 All envy of Ephraim shall vanish, 
    Cut off shall be all that vex Judah. 
No longer shall Ephraim be jealous of Judah, 
    Nor Judah be hostile to Ephraim. 
14 They shall swoop down the slope of the Philistines westward, 
    And plunder together the sons of the East ; 
They shall lay a stern hand upon Edom and Moab, 
    And bring to subjection the children of Ammon. 
15 Jehovah will also dry up 
    The tongue of the sea of Egypt ; 
With the fiery glow of His breath 
    He will swing His hand over the River, 
And smite it to seven streams 
    Such that men may go over in sandals. 
16 And such of His folk as are left 
    Shall return from Assyria on a highway 
Like that on which Israel trod 
    On the day he came up out of Egypt. 

\s The Song of Thanksgiving 
\c 12

1 In that day thou shalt say, 
" I give Thee thanks, Jehovah ; 
    For though Thou wast angry with me, 
Thine anger is turned away 
    And Thou hast comforted me. 
2 See ! God is my salvation, 
    I trust Him unafraid. 
For my strength and my song is Jehovah, 
    And He is become my salvation." 

3 With joy shall ye draw water 
    From the fountains of salvation. 
4 And in that day shall ye say, 
    " Give thanks to Jehovah and call on His name. 
Make known to the nations what things He hath done, 
    Record that His name is exalted on high. 
5 To Jehovah make music, for He hath wrought proudly ; 
    Let this be made known through the length of the world. 
Lift up your voices, ye dwellers in Zion ; 
    For great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel." 

\ms PROPHECIES CONCERNING FOREIGN NATIONS (xiii.-xxiii.) 

\ms2 Prophecy Concerning Babylon 

\s The Doom of Babylon 
\c 13

\p \v 1 Oracle on Babylon: a vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz. 

2 On a bare height raise the signal, 
    And cry aloud to them. 
Wave ye the hand that they enter 
    The gates of those lordly men. 
3 I have Myself commissioned 
    My consecrated servants 
    To execute Mine anger. 
Yea, I have summoned My warriors, 
    My proudly exultant ones. 
4 Hark ! on the hills a tumult 
    As of a mighty multitude. 
Hark ! 'tis the roar of kingdoms, 
    Of nations gathering together. 
Jehovah of Hosts is mustering 
    His army for the battle. 

5 They come from a distant land, 
    From the uttermost end of heaven 
Jehovah, with His weapons of wrath, 
    To ruin all the earth. 
6 Wail ! for the day of Jehovah is nigh, 
    Like destruction from God Almighty it cometh. 
7 All hands shall therefore hang helpless, 
    Each mortal heart will melt, 
    8 And men will be confounded. 
Taken with throes and pangs, 
    They shall writhe like a woman in travail. 
They shall look on each other astonished, 
    With faces all aflame. 

9 Behold ! Jehovah cometh, 
    With wrath and hot anger cruel, 
To make earth a desolation 
    And destroy the sinners upon it. 
10 The heavens and their constellations 
    Shall not flash any light ; 
The sun shall be dark when it riseth, 
    No light of moon shall shine. 
11 I will punish the world for its evil, 
    The godless for their guilt ; 
I will still the conceit of the arrogant, 
    The tyrant's pride lay low. 
12 And men shall be rarer than gold, 
    Yea, mortals than gold of Ophir. 

13 The heavens shall therefore tremble, 
    And the earth quake out of her place, 
At the wrath of Jehovah of Hosts 
    In the day of the heat of His anger. 
14 And then, like a hunted gazelle, 
    Or like sheep that have no one to fold them, 
Shall each set his face to his people, 
    And each to his own land flee. 
15 Whoso is found shall be stabbed, 
    By the sword shall he fall who is caught. 
16 Their babes shall be dashed in pieces 
    Before their very eyes ; 
Their houses shall be plundered, 
    And ravished their wives shall be. 

17 Behold ! I already am stirring 
    The people of Media against them : 
No thought have they of silver, 
    No pleasure take they in gold.  
18 (They grasp their) bows (and spears, 
    Fearful are they and cruel ; 
They shall smite) the young men (all, 
    And the maids) shall be dashed in pieces.
To the fruit of the womb they are ruthless, 
    And children they eye without pity. 
19 Thus Babylon, fairest of kingdoms, 
    The glory and pride of Chaldea, 
Shall perish with doom like the doom 
    To which God hurled Gomorrah and Sodom. 

20 For ever shall she be desolate, 
    Tenantless age after age. 
No Arab shall pitch his tent there, 
    No shepherd shall fold his flock there ; 
21 But there shall wild cats lie, 
    And their homes shall be crowded with jackals. 
And there shall ostriches dwell, 
    And there shall satyrs dance. 
22 Hyenas shall howl in her castles, 
    And wolves in her halls of delight. 
Her time is wellnigh come, 
    Her day lasteth not much longer. 

\s Song of Triumph over the Fall of Babylon's King 
\c 14 

\p \v 1 For Jehovah will take pity on Jacob, He will elect Israel once more and settle them on their own land : resident aliens will join them and attach themselves to the household of Jacob. \v 2 (Alien) peoples will take them and bring them to their place ; and the household of Israel shall employ them in Jehovah's land as men-servants and maid-servants, thus reducing their erstwhile captors to captivity, and lording it over those who had been their taskmasters. 

\p \v 3 Then, in the day that Jehovah giveth you rest from your toil and turmoil and from the hard service that was \v 4 laid upon you, you shall take up this taunt-song over the King of Babylon, and say : 

How still the oppressor is grown ! 
    How still is the insolent raging ! 
5 Jehovah hath broken the staff 
    Of the godless, the sceptre of tyrants, 
6 That smote the peoples in fury 
    With unremitting stroke, 
That trod down the nations in anger 
    With unrelenting tread. 
7 All earth is at rest, is quiet, 
    They break into happy cries. 
8 Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thy fate, 
    And the cedars of Lebanon, saying, 
" Since thou hast been laid low, 
    No woodsman is come to destroy us." 

9 Sheol beneath is a-quiver, 
    Awaiting thine arrival ; 
She rouseth the shades to greet thee 
    All that were chieftains on earth. 
All the kings of the nations 
    She biddeth arise from their thrones. 
10 All of them lift up their voices, 
    And thus they say unto thee : 
" So thou, too, art feeble as we ; 
    Thou art become like us." 
11 Thy pomp hath been brought down to Sheol ---
    The strumming of thy lutes : 
Beneath thee the maggots arc spread, 
    Thy coverlet is worms. 

12 How art thou fallen from heaven, 
    Thou radiant son ef the morning ! 
How art thou struck to the ground, 
    Lying stiff, a corpse upon corpses. 
13 And thou, thou didst say in thine heart, 
" Into heaven I will ascend ; 
I will set my throne on high 
    Above the stars of God, 
And sit on the sacred Mountain
    In the uttermost parts of the north. 
14 I will climb above the cloud-peaks, 
    And rival the Most High." 
15 But down thou art brought to Sheol, 
    To the very depths of the pit. 

16 They that see thee shall gaze and gaze, 
    They shall ask with eyes intent, 
" Is this the man that startled the earth 
    And sent tremors through her kingdoms ; 
17 That made the world like a desert, 
    And overthrew her cities ; 
That left not his prisoners free, 
    To return each man to his home ?" 
18 Now in their honoured tombs 
    All the kings of the nations are lying ; 
19 But thou art cast forth, tombless, 
    Like a hateful untimely birth, 
Clothed upon with the slain, 
    Whose bodies the sword hath pierced, 
That go down to the floor of the pit, 
    Like a carcase trodden under foot. 
20 Thou shalt not be joined unto them 
    In the place where they lie buried ; 
Because thou hast ruined thy land, 
    Thy people thou hast slaughtered. 
May it never be named again ---
    The race of this evil-doer. 
21 Get ready the knife for his sons, 
    To atone for the guilt of their father ; 
Lest they rise and possess the earth, 
    And fill the face of the world. 

\p \v 22 I will rise up against them, saith Jehovah of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon record and remnant, kith and kin, \v 23 saith Jehovah. And I will make it a possession of the bittern, and pools of water ; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith Jehovah of Hosts. 

\ms2 Jehovah's Invincible World-Plan 

24 Jehovah of Hosts hath sworn this oath : 
My plan shall most surely be done, 
    And the thing that I purposed shall stand. 
25 On the land that is Mine I will shatter Assyria, 
    And trample him down on My mountains. 
His yoke shall oppress them no more, 
    And his burden shall pass from their shoulders.
26 This is the purpose formed 
    To humble all the earth ; 
And this is the Hand outstretched 
    Against the nations all. 
27 For who can bring to nought 
    What Jehovah of Hosts hath purposed ? 
And when His is the Hand that is outstretched, 
    Who can turn it back ? 

\ms2 Warning to Philistia 

28 In the year that King Ahaz died, came this oracle : 
29 Rejoice not, ye Philistines all, 
    That the rod that hath scourged you is broken ; 
For an asp from the root of the serpent shall issue, 
    Its fruit shall be a tiery flying serpent. 
30 For the poor shall feed on My meadows,
    The needy shall lie down secure ; 
But thy seed I will kill with famine, 
    Thy remnant I will slay. 

31 Wail, ye gates ; and shriek, ye cities : 
    Melt with fear, ye Philistines all. 
For out of the north cometh smoke (of war), 
    In the ranks of the foe shall no straggler be found. 

32 What answer shall (Judah) make 
    To the envoys of that nation ? 
That " Jehovah Himself is the founder of Zion, 
    And there do His suffering people find refuge." 

\ms2 Lament over Moab 
\c 15 

\p \v1 Oracle on Moab. 

Alas ! in a night hath Ar-Moab 
    Been wasted and ruined. 
Alas ! in a night hath Kir-Moab 
    Been wasted and ruined. 
2 Gone up is the daughter of Dibon 
    To weep on the heights ;
On the summits of Nebo and Medeba 
    Moab doth wail. 
On every head there is baldness, 
    And beards are all shorn. 
On her streets they have girt them with sackcloth, 
    On roofs is lament ; 
On her squares, one and all they are wailing 
    With torrents of tears. 
4 Heshbon and Elealeh cry out, 
    And their cry reaches Jahaz ; 
Whereat Moab's loins fall a-quiver, 
    The soul of her quivers. 
5 My heart crieth out for Moab, 
    They flee towards Zoar ;  
They climb the ascent unto Luhith, 
    And weep as they go ; 
They raise on the way to Horonaim 
    A cry of destruction. 
For ruin hath clean overtaken 
    The waters of Nimrim ; 
The herbage is gone, the grass withered, 
    And verdure is none. 

7 So they bring o'er the Brook of the Willows 
    Their riches and stores ; 
For the cry (of despair) hath gone round 
    All the borders of Moab ; 
The wail thereof reacheth Eglaim, 
    It reacheth Beer-elim. 
9 For the waters of Dimon are bloody. 
    Yet more will I bring upon Dimon ---
A lion on those that escape 
    And are left out of Moab. 

\c 16

2 And then at the fords of the Arnon 
    The daughters of Moab 
Shall flutter like birds, and shall fly 
    As when nestlings are scattered. 
1 Tribute of lambs they despatched. 
    To the lord of the land, 
From Sela, by way of the wilderness, 
    Unto Mount Zion. 
3 " Grant us the aid of your counsel, 
    And mediate (for us) ; 
Shelter us as in the noon-tide 
    With shade deep as night. 
Bring into shelter the outcasts, 
    Betray not the fugitives ; 
4 Suffer the outcasts of Moab 
    To dwell in thy land. 
Be thou a shelter to them 
    From the face of the spoiler." 

When the ruthless are brought to an end, 
    And the spoiler hath ceased ; 
When the heel of the tyrant hath vanished 
    Clean out of the land ; 
5 Then the throne shall be stablished by kindness, 
    And on it shall sit 
In the tent of King David in faithfulness 
    One who will judge 
With a spirit intent on the right 
    And on promptness of justice.  

6 We have heard of the pride of Moab, 
    The utterly proud 
Of her haughty and insolent pride, 
    And her prating all baseless. 
7 So Moab for Moab is wailing, 
    She wails altogether ; 
Yea, utterly stricken they moan 
    For the cakes of Kir-heres. 
8 The vine-tracts of Heshbon are withered, 
    The vineyards of Sibmah, 
Whose choice red wine hath laid low 
    Many a lord of the nations. 
Her clusters did stretch unto Jazer, 
    They strayed to the desert. 
Her tendrils were spread far abroad, 
    They passed over the sea. 

9 So I share in the weeping of Jazer 
    For the vineyards of Sibmah ; 
I drench thee with my tears, 
    O Heshbon and Elealeh : 
For over thy grapes and thy vintage 
    The war-cry is fallen. 
10 From the land of gardens is vanished 
    All gladness and joy ; 
There resoundeth no cry in the vineyards, 
    No shout any more ; 
No wine in the presses is trodden, 
    The shouting is stilled. 
11 So my soul like a harp maketh moaning for Moab, 
    And my heart for Kir-heres. 
12 When Moab appears on the heights
    And doth make herself weary, 
Her prayers at the shrine that she enters 
    Shall prove unavailing. 

\p \v 13 This is a former utterance of Jehovah's concerning Moab. \v 14 But now His message is this : "In  three years, no more and no less, the glory of Moab, despite all her mighty throng, shall be reduced to contempt, and those that survive shall be very few and feeble." 

\ms2 Prophecy Concerning Damascus and Northern Israel 

\s The Destruction of Damascus 

\c 17 

\p \v 1 Oracle on Damascus 

See ! soon shall Damascus no more be a city, 
    But only a ruin, forsaken for ever. 
2 To the grazing of flocks shall her cities be given, 
    And there shall they lie, with not one to affright them. 
3 The fortress shall vanish from Ephraim, 
    And the dynasty from Damascus. 
The remnant of Aram shall perish,   
    Their fate shall be Israel's fate, 
    Saith Jehovah of Hosts. 

\s The Doom of Israel 

4 That day it shall come to pass 
That the glory of Jacob shall pale, 
    And the fat of his flesh shall be wasted ; 
5 Or like gleanings it shall be, 
    When a reaper doth gather the corn, 
And his arm reapeth the ears 
    The ears of corn that are gleaned 
    In the valley of Rephaim ; 
6 Or the gleanings that are left 
    When an olive-tree hath been beaten 
A berry or two on the uppermost branch, 
    Four or five on the boughs of a fruit tree : 
    Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel. 
7 In that day men shall look to their Maker, 
    And turn their eyes unto Israel's Holy One ; 
8 Not to the work of their hands shall they look, 
    Nor to things that their fingers have made shall they turn. 
9 That day shall thy cities deserted be 
    Like the derelict cities of Hivite and Amorite.
10 Because thou forgattest the God who had helped thee, 
    And didst not remember the Rock of thy Refuge ; 
Though thou plantest Adonis' gardens, 
    And stock'st them with alien 4 slips ; 
11 Though thou fence them the day they are set, 
    And next morn bring thy seedlings to blossom : 
Thy harvest shall vanish away 
    In the day of thy sickness and desperate pain. 

\ms2 The Speedy Doom of the Assyrians 

\s Their Sudden Destruction 

12 Ha! 
The uproar of peoples many ! 
    They roar like the roar of the sea : 
The thunder of mighty nations, 
    They thunder as Ocean thunders. 
13 But Jehovah shall rebuke them, 
    And far they shall flee, pursued 
Like chaff on the hills before wind, 
    Or like dust in the face of the hurricane. 
14 At even-tide, lo ! terror : 
    Ere morning they are gone. 
Such is the fate of those that despoil us, 
    The lot of those that plunder us. 

\s Isaiah's Answer to the Ethiopian Ambassadors 
\c 17 

1 Ah, land of the buzzing of wings 
    Beyond the rivers of Cush, 
2 That despatcheth ambassadors over the sea* 
    In vessels of reed on the face of the waters. 
" Depart, ye messengers fleet, 
    To your tall and bronze-skinned people, 
    Whose land is divided by rivers ---
Your nation strong and victorious, 
    Dreaded both near and far. 
3 All ye that inhabit the world," 
    And dwell upon the earth : 
When a signal is raised, beware, 
    And hark, when the trumpet is blown. 

4 For thus saith Jehovah to me, 
    ' From My place I watch untroubled, 
Still as shimmering heat in sunshine, 
    Or dew-clouds in time of harvest.' 
5 For before the harvest, when blossom is over, 
    And the berry becometh a ripening grape, 
He will lop off the branches with pruning-hooks, 
    He will sever the tendrils and cast them away. 
6 They shall all be left to the beasts of the land, 
    To the ravenous birds that haunt the mountains 
All summer the ravenous birds shall devour them, 
    All winter the beasts of the land shall consume them." 

\p 7 At that time shall a gift of homage be brought to Jehovah of Hosts from that tall and bronze-skinned people, whose land is divided by rivers that nation strong and victorious, dreaded near and far to Mount Zion, the place of the name of Jehovah of Hosts. 

\ms2 The Destiny of Egypt 
\s The Disasters of Egypt 
\c 19

\p \v 1 Oracle on Egypt 

1 Behold ! on swift cloud riding 
    Jehovah is coming to Egypt : 
The idols of Egypt shall quake at His presence, 
    The heart of Egypt shall melt within her. 

2 I will spur on Egypt to fight against Egypt, 
    Brother with brother, and neighbour with neighbour, 
    City with city, and kingdom with kingdom. 

3 Then will Egypt be drained of the spirit within her, 
    And I will confound her counsels : 
To idols and muttering wraiths they shall seek, 
    To ghosts and familiar spirits. 

4 And I will deliver Egypt 
    Into a stern lord's hands ; 
A king that is fierce shall rule over her, 
    Saith the Lord Jehovah of Hosts. 

5 And the sea shall be drained of its water, 
    The river be parched and dry ; 
6 Its branches shall dwindle and stink, 
    And the arms of the Nile shall be parched. 
Reeds and rushes shall wither, 
    7 The sedge* on its brink shall shrivel ; 
And all that is sown by the Nile 
    Shall be withered and whirled into nothing. 

8 The fishers shall mourn and lament, 
    That cast their hook in the Nile ; 
And all that spread their nets 
    On the face of the waters shall languish. 

9 The workers in flax shall be shamed, 
    The combers and weavers of white stuff ; 
10 The weavers of cloth shall be crushed, 
    And the workers for hire shall be sorrowful. 

11 Sheer fools are the princes of Zoan ;
    The wisest of Pharaoh's counsellors 
    Prove but a witless council. 
How then can ye say unto Pharaoh, 
    " A son of the wise am I, 
    A son of ancient kings"? 

12 Where are thy wise men, then ? 
    Let them, pray, declare unto thee, 
And make known what Jehovah of Hosts 
    Hath purposed to do unto Egypt. 

13 Befooled are the princes of Zoan, 
    Deceived are the princes of Memphis ; 
The chieftains of her tribes 
    Have led Egypt all astray. 

14 Jehovah hath mingled within them 
    The spirit of clouded judgment ; 
And so they led Egypt astray 
    In all her enterprise, 
    As a drunkard doth stray in his vomit. 

15 Thus head, tail, palm-branch and rush, 
    Shall nothing accomplish for Egypt. 

\s The Conversion of Egypt 

\p \v 16 In that day shall Egypt fear and tremble like a woman, at the Hand which Jehovah of Hosts \v 17 will swing over her. The land of Judah shall be a terror to her ; the very mention of the name shall fill her with dread at the thought of the purpose which Jehovah of Hosts hath formed against her. 

\p \v 18 In that day there shall be in the land of Egypt five cities speaking the language of Canaan, and swearing allegiance to Jehovah of Hosts ; and one of them shall be called the City of the Sun. 

\p \v 19 In that day there shall be an altar to Jehovah in the heart of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to \v 20 Jehovah at the border. It shall be a sign and a witness to Jehovah of Hosts in the land of Egypt : for when, under oppression, they cry to Jehovah to send a deliverer, He will intervene and rescue \v 21 them. And Jehovah will reveal Himself to the 
Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall acknowledge Jehovah on that day : they shall worship Him with sacrifice and offering, they shall make vows to Jehovah and discharge them. Jehovah will smite \v 22 Egypt smite and heal her : when they turn to 
Jehovah, He will heal them in answer to their 
entreaty. 

\p \v 23 In that day there shall be a highway between Egypt and Assyria ; Assyrians will come to Egypt, and Egyptians to Assyria : Egyptians and Assyrians shall worship (Jehovah) in common. 

\p \v 24 In that day Israel will join Egypt and Assyria in a triple alliance, and so bring blessing to the world \v 25 around, which Jehovah of Hosts hath in these words blessed : " Blessed be Egypt My people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel My inheritance." 

\ms2 Warning against the Folly of an Alliance with Egypt 
\c 20 

\p v 2 At that time Isaiah the son of Amoz received a 
message from Jehovah, bidding him go and take 
the sackcloth from his loins and the sandals from 
his feet ; and this he did, going about without mantle or shoe. \v 1 Then in the year 8 that the Tartan, who had been despatched by Sargon King of Assyria, \v 3 came to Ashdod and took it by storm, Jehovah said, "Just as My servant Isaiah has gone for three years without mantle or shoe for a sign and a symbol to \v 4 Egypt and Ethiopia, so shall the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, be led away by the King of Assyria without mantle or \v 5 shoe, and with buttocks exposed. \v 6 Then those who had looked with hope to Ethiopia and made their boast of Egypt, shall be put to shame and dismay. \v 6 And in that day the people who live in the 
coast-land \v 8 shall say, ' If this be the fate of those to whom we had fled in expectation of help and deliverance from the King of Assyria, how can we escape ?' " 

\ms2 The Fall of Babylon 
\s The Fall of Babylon : Its Consequences for Judah 
\c 21  

\p \v 1 Oracle on the Wilderness 

Like the roar of the whirlwind 
    That sweeps through the southland, 
It comes from the desert, 
    That land of dread. 
2 A vision full stern 
    Hath been told unto me : 
The robber still robbeth, 
    The spoiler still spoileth. 
" Go up, O Elam ; 
    O Media, lay siege : 
All the sighs of the crushed 
    Have I brought to an end." 
3 For this cause my loins 
    Are filled with anguish ; 
With pangs am I seized 
    Like a woman in travail. 
I writhe with the message, 
    The vision confounds me. 
4 My mind goes a-wandering, 
    Horror appals me ; 
The twilight I love 
    Hath been turned into trembling. 
5 The tables are ready, 
    The carpets are spread, 
They are eating and drinking. 
    Arise, ye princes, 
Spread oil on the shields. 

6 For on this wise the Lord 
    Hath spoken to me : 
" Go, station a watchman 
    To tell what he sees. 
7 If he seeth a troop, 
    Horsemen in pairs, 
A train of asses, 
    A train of camels, 
Then let him give heed 
    With most diligent heed." 

8 And the watchman 7 cried, 
" On the watch-tower, O Lord, 
    Do I stand all the day ; 
At my post am I stationed 
    The live-long night. 
9 Lo ! a troop I see coming, 
    Of horsemen in pairs." 
And he uttered these words, 
    " Fallen, fallen is Babylon : 
Down to the ground 
    Fall her images shattered." 

10 Ye my folk that were threshed 
    Like the corn on the floor, 
I have told you my message 
    From Israel's God, 
    From Jehovah of Hosts. 

\s The Fall of Babylon : Its Consequences for the Trading 
Tribes of the Desert 

\p \v 11 Oracle on Edom 

One calleth to me out of Sc-ir, 
" Watchman, how late in the night ? 
    " Watchman, how late in the night ?" 
12 The watchman made answer, 
" The morning approacheth, 
    But still it is night. 8 
If ye would enquire, 
    Come hither again." 

\nb \v 13 Oracle " in the steppe " 

In the bush, in the steppe, ye must lodge for the night, 
    Ye caravans of Dedan.
14 Ye dwellers in Tema's" land, 
Bring water to meet the thirsty, 
    And offer the fugitives bread. 
15 For before the sword they are fled, 
    Before the whetted sword, 
Before the bow that is bent, 
    Before the press of battle. 

\p \v16 For thus hath the Lord said unto me, " Within a year, no more and no less, 18 shall all the glory of \v 17 Kedar \v 18 be at an end ; and few shall remain of the mighty archers of the Kedarenes. Jehovah the God of Israel hath decreed it." 

\ms2 Judah's Unpardonable Sin 
\c 22

\p \v 1 Oracle on the Valley of Vision 

What mean ye that ye are gone up, 
    One and all, to the house-tops, 
2 O Town filled with uproar and tumult, 
    O City exultant ? 
Thy slain are not slain with the sword, 
    Neither fallen in battle. 
3 Thy chieftains are all fled together 
    That wielded the bow, 
And thy strong men are all taken prisoners, 
    Though far they had fled. 
4 " Turn away from me," therefore I say, 
    " Bitter tears would I shed. 
Urge not upon me your comfort, 
    My people are ruined." 

5 For a day of confusion and trampling and tumult, 
    Doth come from the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts. 
They tear down the wall in the Valley of Hinnom,
    The war-cry ascends to the mountains. 
6 Elam seized the quiver, 
    And Aram* came riding on horses. 
Kir uncovered the shield, 
    7 Thy choicest of valleys was crowded 
With chariots and horsemen, 
    Arrayed for assault on the gate. 
8 Then ye looked to the arms in the House of the Forest, 
    9a Ye had eyes for the gaps in the Fortress of David ; 
11b But ye looked not to Him that was doing all this, 
    Ye had no eyes for Him who had planned it of old. 
12 So the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, hath called you 
    To weeping and mourning, to baldness and sack-cloth ; 
13 But see ! there is nothing but mirth and rejoicing, 
    Slaying of oxen and killing of sheep, 
Eating and drinking, " because " (as ye say) 
    " We may haply be dead men to-morrow." 
14 Jehovah of Hosts hath declared in mine ear, 
    " This sin shall assuredly never be purged 
    Till ye die " saith the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts. 

\ms2 Personal Threats and Promises 
\s The Doom of Shebna 

15 Against Shebna, the Governor of the Palace.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, 
    Go, get thee to yonder prefect (and say), 
16 "What right hast thou here, and what kin hast thou here, 
    That thou hewest thee here a sepulchre ---  
That here on the height thou dost hew thee a sepulchre, 
    Carving a home for thyself on the rock ? 
17 Behold, Jehovah will firmly enwrap thee, 
    And wind thee and wind thee around and around : 
18 He will hurl thee and hurl thee afar like a ball, 
    Mighty man that thou art, to a spacious land. 
Thither thy glorious chariots shall follow, 
    And there shalt thou die, 
    Thou disgrace of the house of thy lord. 

\s The Exaltation of Eliakim 

19 I will thrust thee from thine office, 
    And tear thee down from thy post. 
20 That day will I summon My servant, 
    Eliakim, son of Hilkiah. 
21 I will put thy mantle upon him, 
    And bind thy sash about him, 
    And give thine authority into his hand. 
And a father shall he be 
    To the folk of Jerusalem and the household of Judah, 
22 I will lay upon his shoulder 
    The key of the house of David, 
So that none may shut when he opens, 
    Nor open when he shuts. 
23 I will fasten him securely, 
    Like a nail in a place that is firm. 
Through him shah 1 his father's house 
    Be lifted to seats of honour." 

\s The Downfall of Eliakim's Faintly 

\p\v 24 His family will hang upon him with all their weight off-spring and off-scourings, all the meaner sort of vessels, be they bowls or be they pitchers. \v 25 In that day, saith Jehovah of Hosts, shall the nail so firmly fastened be removed with a wrench, and down shall come in ruin all that had hung upon it: for Jehovah of Hosts hath spoken it. 

\ms2 The Fate of Phoenicia 
\s The Elegy 
\c 23
 
\p \v 1 Oracle on Tyre. 

Wail, ye ships of Tarshish : 
    Your haven is ruined. 
On your way from the island of Cyprus 
    The tale hath been told you. 
2 The folk of the coast-land are perished, 
    The merchants of Sidon, 
Who traversed the sea, and whose envoys 
    Did sail many waters, 
3 Whose harvest was wheat from the Nile, 
    And whose revenue trade with the nations. 
4 O Sidon, thou Mother of Cities, 
    Thou Stronghold of Ocean, 
    In shame take up this lament : 
" The youths that with anguish I bore and brought up 
    And the maidens I reared, are no more." 
5 When tidings are come unto Egypt ---
    The tidings of Tyre ---
    In sore pain shall they be. 

6 Pass over to Tarshish, and wail, 
    Ye that dwell on the coast land. 
7 Is this your jubilant city, 
    Which dates from of old, 
Whose feet in the olden time bore her 
    To settle afar ? 
8 Who then hath purposed this doom 
    Against Tyre, the crowned Queen, 
Whose merchants and traders were princes, 
    Most honoured of earth ? 
9 'Tis Jehovah of Hosts that hath planned it, 
    To desecrate pride, 
To bring to contempt all splendour, 
    All pomp of the earth. 

10 Lament, ye ships of Tarshish, 
    Your haven is gone. 
11 He hath stretched out His hand o'er the sea, 
    He hath shaken the kingdoms. 
Jehovah hath charged touching Canaan 
    To ruin her fortresses. 
12 Exult no more, thou art ruined, 
    O daughter of Sidon. 
Arise, and pass over to Cyprus" 
    There, too, thou shalt rest not. 
14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, 
    Your haven is ruined. 

\s The Revival of Tyre 

\p \v 15 In that day Tyre shall pass into oblivion for seventy years, covering the period of one dynasty. At the end of seventy years, Tyre shall fare like the harlot in the song : 

16 With lyre in hand, walk up and down the city, 
    Harlot, forgot by all : 
Play skilfully, and sing them many a ditty, 
    That they may thee recall. 

\p \v 17 But at the end of seventy years Jehovah shall visit Tyre (with favour). She will resume her meretricious practices, selling herself to all the kingdoms of the \v 18 world on the face of the earth. But her gains from this traffic shall be dedicated to Jehovah : they shall not be stored or hoarded, but they are to belong to those who dwell in Jehovah's presence ; and these are to be furnished therefrom with abundance of food and stately apparel.

\ms THE GREAT WORLD-JUDGMENT (xxiv.-xxvii.) 
\ms2 The Judgment: The Rebels Punished 
\c 24

1 Hark ! soon will Jehovah empty 
    And desolate the earth. 
Her semblance He will distort, 
    Her inhabitants He will scatter. 
2 Then the priest shall fare as the plain man, 
    The master shall fare as the servant, 
    The mistress as the maid. 
The seller shall fare as the buyer, 
    The borrower shall fare as the lender, 
    The creditor as the debtor. 
3 The earth shall be utterly emptied, 
    The world shall be utterly spoiled, 
    For Jehovah hath so decreed. 

4 The earth doth mourn and wither, 
    The world doth languish and wither, 
    High heaven, like earth, doth languish. 
5 The earth is ail polluted 
    Beneath the people that tread it ; 
For law they have transgressed, 
    And statute overstepped, 
    They have broken the eternal covenant. 
6 So a curse hath devoured the earth, 
    It doth light on her guilty people ; 
The people of earth are scorched, 
    And few are the men that are left. 
7a The new wine mourneth, the wine doth languish, 
    11b And over the land is an outcry for wine ; 
7b All merry hearts are sighing, 
    8b The tumult of gladness is silent. 
8a Hushed is the mirth of the timbrel, 
    Be The mirth of the lute is hushed. 
9 No more is there drinking of wine with singing, 
    Strong drink is hitter to those that drink it. 
10 The City of Chaos 2 is shattered, 
    11a The houses are bolted and barred ; 
11c All merriment is over, 
    11d And gladness is vanished from earth. 
12 Desolation is left in the city, 
    The gates are battered to ruins. 

13 Few in the midst of the earth 
    Shall be those that are left of the nations 
Few as the olives when beaten, 
    Or grapes when the vintage is past. 
14 Yonder they lift their voices 
    In ringing shouts of joy ; 
To the glorious Jehovah 
    They cry from over the sea. 
15 "Now then ye folk of the east, 
    Give glory to Jehovah, 
And ye in the isles of the sea, 
    To the name of Israel's God." 
16 From the uttermost parts of the earth 
    There float to us songs of praise : 
    " Now glory hath dawned for the righteous." 

" Ah misery, misery me," said I, 
    " For the robbers are robbing and robbing still." 
17 Trap, terror, and pit are before you, 
    All ye that dwell on the earth. 
18 He that flies from the terror shall fall down the pit, 
    He that creeps from the pit shall be caught in the trap. 
For the windows of heaven are opened, 
    And earth's foundations tremble. 
19 The earth is breaking asunder, 
    The earth is splitting asunder, 
    The earth is shaking asunder. 
20 The earth like a drunkard is reeling, 
    She sways to and fro like a hammock : 
So heavy a guilt lies upon her 
    She falleth, to rise no more. 

21 That day Jehovah shall punish 
The host of high heaven in the height , 
    And the kings of the earth on the earth. 
22 And swept shall they be to a dungeon, like prisoners, 
    And pent in the prison long time they shall lie, 
    Till the day of their punishment dawns. 
23 Then the moon shall veil her face, 
    And the sun shall hide in shame ; 
For Jehovah of Hosts, enthroned 
    In Jerusalem on Mount Zion, 
Shall manifest His glory 
    In the presence of His elders. 

\ms2 The Banquet of the Nations on Mount Zion 
\c 25

6 On this mountain Jehovah of Hosts 
    Shall prepare for all the nations 
A feast of pieces fat, 
    A feast of wine on the lees 
Fat pieces full of marrow, 
    And wine on the lees well strained. 
7 He shall rend on this mountain the veil 
    That enwrappeth the face of all peoples, 
And veileth the face of all nations. 
    8 He will swallow up death for ever. 
And then will the Lord Jehovah 
    Wipe tears from every face, 
And remove from off the earth 
    The reproach that hath clung to His people. 
    Jehovah Himself hath decreed it. 

\ms2 Israel's Security in the Great World-Judgment 
\c 26 

20 O people of mine, come, enter thy chambers, 
    And shut thy doors behind thee ; 
And hide thee but for a moment, 
    Till the wrath be overpast. 
21 For Jehovah, behold ! cometh forth from His place, 
    To punish the dwellers on earth for their guilt ; 
And the earth shall disclose her blood, 
    She shall cover her slain no more, 
\c 27
\q \v 1 When that day cometh, Jehovah shall punish, 
    With His fierce and great and mighty sword, 
Leviathan the fleeing serpent, 
    And Leviathan the coiled serpent, 
    And the great sea-monster He will slay. 
12 That day will Jehovah beat out the grain 
    From the river Euphrates to the torrent of Egypt, 
    And ye shall be gleaned, one by one, sons of Israel. 
13 That day, at the blast of a mighty trumpet, 
The men that were lost in the land of Assyria, 
    And those that were outcast in Egypt's land, 
Shall come and bow down to Jehovah in worship 
    On the holy Mount in Jerusalem. 

\ms2 Song of Thanksgiving over the Destruction of Some Proud City 
\c 25

1 Jehovah, Thou art my God ; 
    I exalt Thee, I praise Thy name : 
For a marvellous thing Thou hast done, 
    Long purposed, now come to fulfilment. 
2 Thou hast made of a city a heap, 
    Of a fortified city a ruin ; 
The palace of pride 2 is a city no more, 
    It shall not be rebuilt for ever. 
3 For this shall fierce nations own Thy glory, 
    The city of tyrants shall fear Thee. 
4 For unto the weak Thou hast proved Thee a stronghold, 
    A stronghold wast Thou to the poor in his straits 
    A refuge from storm and a shadow from heat. 
5 Thou subduest the voice of the proud, 
    And thou humblest the song of the tyrant. 

\ms2 Song over the Anticipated Destruction of Moab 

9 That day it shall be said : 
Behold ! this is our God, 
    For whom we have waited --- to save us. 
This is Jehovah for whom we have waited. 
    O let us rejoice and be glad He hath saved us. 
10 For here upon this mountain 
    The hand of Jehovah shall rest ; 
And Moab shall be trampled 
    In the place whereon he standeth, 
    As straw in a dung- pit is trampled. 
11 Should he spread forth his hands therein, 
    As a swimmer spreads forth to swim, 
His soaring pride shall be humbled, 
    Despite all the craft of his hands. 

\ms2 Song of Gratitude and Hope
\s Jerusalem Secure : The Proud City Destroyed 
\c 26

\p \v 1 In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah: 

A strong City is ours, 
    With bulwarks and walls 
    That He sets for our safety. 
2 Open the gates, 
    That the righteous may enter 
    Who keepeth the faith. 
3 The mind that is steady 
    Thou keepest in weal, 
    For it trusteth in Thee. 
4 Trust in Jehovah 
    For evermore ; 
For Jah Jehovah 
    Is Rock of Ages. 
5 For down He hath cast 
    The dwellers on high, 
    The towering city, 
Abasing it even to the ground, 
    And laying it low in the dust. 
6 The foot shall trample it 
    The feet of the poor, 
    And the steps of the needy. 

\s It is Well with the Righteous, Ill with the Persistently 
Wicked 

7 The path of the upright is even, 
    Thou smoothest the way of the righteous. 
8 We have looked for Thee, O Jehovah, 
    To come by Thy pathway of judgment ; 
We have yearned for a sign of Thy presence, 
    Which men may remember for ever. 
9 I have yearned for Thee in the night, 
    Yea, with passionate spirit have sought Thee. 
When Thy judgments come over the world, 
    Those that dwell on the earth learn righteousness. 
10 No grace shall be shown to the wicked, 
    Who righteousness will not learn, 
But even in the land of truth 
    Persist in their evil ways, 
And are altogether blind 
    To the majesty of Jehovah. 

\s The Utter Destruction of the Enemy 

11 Jehovah, Thy hand is uplifted, 
    But they are blind thereto ; 
    May they see it, and be ashamed. 
Let the fire, reserved for Thy foes, 
    And Thy zeal for Thy people consume them. 
12 O Jehovah, establish our welfare ; 
    For all that we have achieved 
    Hath been wrought for us by Thee. 
13 O Jehovah who art our God, 
    Lords other than Thyself 
Have held us in their sway, 
    But Thy name alone will we praise. 
14 The dead shall not live again, 
    The shades shall not arise ; 
Thou hast visited them with destruction, 
    And blotted their memory clean. 

\s A Yet More Glorious Day 

15 Thou hast, O Jehovah, increased the nation, 
    Enlarged all the bounds of the land, 
    And shown Thyself most glorious. 
16 In our straits, O Jehovah, we sought Thee ; 
    We cried, because we were crushed, 
    Thy chastisement was upon us. 
17 As a woman that is with child, 
    When she draweth nigh her time, 
    Doth cry aloud in her pangs ; 
So were we, Lord, because of Thy presence. 
    18 For we, too, writhed in pangs, 
    But we brought forth nothing but wind. 
We achieved for the land no deliverance ; 
    The denizens of the world 
    Fell not (in battle) before us. 
19 Thy dead shall arise unto life, 
    They that dwell in the dust shall awake, 
    And utter cries of joy ; 
For a dew (from the regions) of light is Thy dew, 
    And the earth (refreshed thereby) 
    Shall quicken the shades into life. 10 

\ms2 Song of the Vineyard 
\c 27  

2 In that day it shall be said : 
Vineyard delightsome, 
    Sing ye of it. 
3 I am its guardian Jehovah 
    I water it moment by moment ; 
That no leaf of it shall fail, 
    By day and by night I guard it. 
4 I cherish no anger against it. 
    But had I the briers and thorns,
I would trample them down in the fray, 
    I would burn them up altogether. 
5 Else, then, let them seek My protection, 
    And let them make peace with Me ; 
    Yea, peace let them make with Me. 
6 That day shall Jacob take root, 
    Israel shall blossom and bud, 
    And with fruit fill the face of the world. 

\ms2 Jehovah's Mery to Israel

7 Hath (Israel) been smitten so sorely 
    As those that smote her have been smitten ? 
Or hath she been slain without remnant, 
    As those that slew her have been slain ? 
8 By dismissal and exile alone 
    Doth (Jehovah) contend with her : 
He hath swept her away by His blast 
    That blows fierce in the day of sirocco. 
9 On this condition therefore 
    Shall Israel's guilt be forgiven ---
When she putteth away her sin 
    The issue thereof shall be this ---
That all the stones of her altars 
    She shall grind, like chalk, to powder ; 
That sacred poles and sun-pillars  
    She never shall raise again. 
10 For the fortified city is desolate, 
    A homestead forsaken, forlorn, 
Like a pasture : there browseth the calf 
    There he lieth, consuming the branches ; 
11 And there, when the dry boughs are broken, 
    Come women who use them for fuel. 
For the people would not reflect ; 
And so from their Maker they win no pity, 
    No favour from their Creator. 


\ms WARNINGS AND PROMISES TO JERUSALEM (xxviii.-xxxiii.) 
\ms2 Woe to Samaria 
\c 28

1 Woe to the coronet proud of the drunkards of Ephraim ! 
    Woe to the fading flower of her glorious beauty, 
    Which crowneth the heads of the men that are prostrate with wine ! 
2 See ! the Lord hath in readiness one 2 that is mighty and strong 
    Like a storm of hail, or like tempest destructive, 
Like storm of a mighty tempestuous flood 
    That will bring her with violence down to the ground. 
3 The coronet proud of the drunkards of Ephraim 
    Shall be trampled under foot ; 
4 And the fading flower of her glorious beauty, 
    Which crowned the head of the fertile valley, 
Shall be as the first ripe fig before summer- 
No sooner seen than swallowed, 
    The moment it is in the hand. 

5 But that day will Jehovah of Hosts 
    Unto those that are left of His people 
    Be Coronet lovely and Diadem fair 
6 A spirit of justice to him 
    That presideth over justice, 
Of valour to those at the gate 
    That stem the tide of war. 

\ms2 The Scoffers of Jerusalem Threatened 
\s Isaiah's Solemn Warning to the Drunken Priests and Prophets 

7 But here also men reel with wine 
    And stagger under drink ; 
Yea, with drink reel prophet and priest, 
    With wine they are utterly dazed. 
They reel in the hour of vision, 
    They  totter in giving of judgment ; 
8 All tables are full of vomit, 
    And filth is everywhere. 

9 " To whom does he mean to teach knowledge, 
    And impart his revelation ? 
To children weaned from the milk, 
    To babes just drawn from the breast 
10 With his law upon law, law upon law, 
    Saw upon saw, saw upon saw, 
    Here a little and there a little ?" 

11 (Well ! thus I answer your mocking.) 
Through barbarous lips and a foreign tongue 
    Will (Jehovah now) speak to this people. 
12 For once had His message to you been this : 
" The true rest is this let the weary enjoy it : 
    And this is repose." But ye turned a deaf ear. 
13 So on this wise Jehovah will speak to you now : 
    " Law upon law, law upon law, 
    Saw upon saw, saw upon saw, 
    Here a little, and there a little " 
To the end that ye trip on your way and fall backward,     
    Shattered and snared and taken. 

\s The Folly of the Egyptian Alliance 

14 Hear therefore the word of Jehovah, ye scoffers, 
    Who rule this folk in Jerusalem. 
15 Because ye have said, " We are leagued with Death, 
    And with Sheol we are in compact ; 
So the flood, though it passes in whelming torrents, 
    Shall never reach unto us ; 
For a lie we have made our refuge, 
    We have sheltered ourselves behind falsehood ": 
16 Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah, 
    Behold ! I am laying in Zion a stone, 
A tried and precious foundation stone, 
    And he that believeth shall not give way. 
17 And I will make justice the measuring-line, 
    And righteousness the plummet. 
Then the refuge of lies shall be swept by hail, 
    And the shelter deluged by water. 
18 Your league with Death shall be clean disannulled, 
    And your compact with Sheol shall no wise stand. 
When the flood sweepeth on, it will trample you down ; 
    Each time that it passeth, 'twill bear you away. 
19 It shall pass every morning by day and by night 
    And the word, grasped at last, shall bring nothing but terror. 
20 For the bed is too short for a man to stretch out in, 
    The cover too narrow to wrap himself round. 
21 For Jehovah shall rise as He rose on mount Perazim, 
    Blazing with wrath as in Gibeon's vale, 
To perform His task that task so strange, 
    To accomplish His work that work so alien. 

22 Now scoff ye no more, lest your bands become tighter ; 
    For this have I heard from Jehovah of Hosts 
    A decree of destruction o'er all the earth. 

\ms2 The Patience and Considerateness of the Divine Purpose

23 Listen, and hear ye my voice ; 
    Attend and give ear to my speech. 
24 Doth the ploughman keep ploughing for ever, 
    Keep opening and harrowing his ground ? 
25 Doth he not, after levelling its surface, 
    Scatter broadcast fennel and cummin, 
And plant there wheat and barley, 
    And, for its border, spelt ? 
26 Jehovah it is that hath trained him aright, 
    And his God it is that hath taught him. 

27 Men thresh not fennel with sledges, 
    Nor are cart-wheels rolled over cummin ; 
But fennel is threshed with a staff, 
    And cummin with a flail. 
28 Do we ever crush bread-corn to pieces ? 
    Nay, we do not keep threshing for ever ; 
But after the wheel has rolled over it, 
    We spread it, but do not crush it. 
29 From Jehovah of Hosts doth this also proceed, 
    Whose wisdom is great, and whose counsel is marvellous. 

\ms2 The Character and Fate of Jerusalem 
\s The Fate of Jerusalem 
\c 29 

1 Woe to thee, Ariel, Ariel, 
    City where David encamped. 
Let one or two years pass by, 
    A cycle of festivals more, 
2 And distress I will bring upon Ariel, 
    Moaning and lamentation, 
And thou shalt be Ariel indeed. 
    3 I will camp, like David, against thee, 
And circle thee round with entrenchments, 
    And set up forts against thee. 
4 And low from the ground shalt thou speak, 
    And thy words from the dust shall rise humbly 
With voice like a ghost's from the ground, 
    Yea, with twittering speech from the dust. 
5 But the horde of thy foes shall become like fine dust, 
    And the horde of the tyrants like flitting chaff.
Then swiftly and suddenly thou 
    6 From Jehovah of Hosts shalt be visited 
With thunder and with earthquake, 
    And with a din stupendous, 
With whirlwind and with tempest, 
    And flame of devouring fire. 
But the horde of all the nations 
    In battle array against Ariel, 
With all their entrenchments and forts 
    And all the hosts that distress her, 
    Shall be as a dream, as a vision of night. 
Like a man that is hungry, who dreams that he eateth 
    And waketh to find his desire unappeased ; 
Like a man that is thirsty, who dreams that he drinketh, 
    And waketh all faint, with his thirst unquenched : 
Even so shall it be with the horde of all nations 
    That fight against Mount Zion. 

\s The Spiritual Torpot and Religions Formality of the People 

9 Utterly dazed shall ye be, 
    Yea, utterly blind shall ye be, 
And drunken, though not with wine, 
    Yea, reeling, though not with strong drink. 
10 For Jehovah hath poured upon you 
    A spirit of slumber deep ; 
Your eyes He hath firmly sealed, 
    And your heads He hath muffled so close 
11 That the sight of all this is to you 
    As the words of a book that is sealed. 

\p \v 12 If put into the hands of a scholar with the request that he read it, he will reply, "I cannot, it is sealed." If, however, it be put into the hands of a man who is no scholar, with the request that he read it, he will reply, " I cannot, I am no scholar." 

13 And the Lord said : 
Because this people draw nigh with their mouth, 
Honouring Me with their lips, 
    While their hearts are far away 
Their religion only a mockery, 
    Formulae learned by rote --
14 I will deal with them therefore once more 
    In a fashion so wondrous strange 
That their wise men's wisdom shall perish, 
    Their prudent men's prudence shall vanish. 
15 Woe unto them that conceal 
    From Jehovah their deep designs,
Doing their deeds in the dark, 
    Unseen, unperceived --- so they fancy ! 

\ms2 Doubters Rebuked by a Vision of Israel's Welfare in the Latter Days 

16 O perverse that ye are I 
    Is the potter no more than the clay ? 
Shall the thing that is made maintain 
    That it hath not been made by its maker ? 
Shall the thing that is fashioned deny 
    That the potter hath understanding ? 
17 Assuredly but a while ---
    A very little while ---
And into a garden-land 
    Shall Lebanon be transformed, 
And the garden-land shall be counted 
    A veritable forest. 
18 In that day even the deaf 
    Shall hear the words of the Book, 
And out of the gloom and darkness 
    The eyes of the blind shall see. 
19 And then shall the humble win 
    A new joy in Jehovah, 
And the poorest shall exult 
    In the Holy One of Israel. 
20 For then shall the tyrant have vanished, 
    And then shall the scoffer have ceased ; 
And those that were zealous in sin 
    Shall all have been rooted out, 
21 With those that have falsely condemned, 
    And sought to entrap the judge,
    And quibbled to injure the innocent. 
22 Thus therefore saith Jehovah, 
    The God of the household of Jacob, 
    Who Abraham did redeem : 
Nevermore shall Jacob be shamed, 
    Nor ever again grow pale. 
23 For the moment he beholdeth 
    What My hands have wrought in his midst, 
    They shall count My name as holy ; 
The Holy One of Jacob 
    They then shall count as holy, 
    And in awe hold the God of Israel. 
24 Those that had erred in spirit 
    Shall then win understanding ; 
And those that had been murmurers 
    Shall willingly learn the Truth. 

\ms2 The Egyptian Alliance a Ruinous Policy 
\s The Embassy to Egypt 
\c 30

1 Ha ! ye refractory sons, saith Jehovah, 
    That follow a purpose I did not inspire, 
And that make an alliance that I did not sanction, 
    Thus heaping sin upon sin. 
2 They start on their journey to Egypt, 
    Without consulting Me, 
To flee to the shelter of Pharaoh, 
    And hide in the shadow of Egypt. 
3 But the shelter of Pharaoh shall turn to your shame, 
    And the shadow of Egypt shall prove your confusion. 
4 The princes encamp in Zoan, 
    The envoys arrive at Hanes, 
5 All of them laden with gifts 
    For a people that cannot avail them, 
That bringeth no help or profit, 
    But only disgrace and shame. 

6 Oracle concerning the beasts of the South. 
    Through a land of distress and hardship, 
Of lioness and roaring lion, 
    Of viper and flying dragon, 
They carry their wealth on the backs of young asses, 
    Their treasures on humps of camels, 
To a people that cannot avail them, 
    Whose help is vain and empty. 
7 And therefore I name her Rahab, 
    The monster brought to silence. 

\s Judah's Rebellion and Ruin 

8 Now go and write it down, 
    And on a roll inscribe it, 
That it may be for the after-time, 
    A testimony for ever. 
9 For a rebel people are they, 
    Sons that are utterly false, 
Sons that refuse to listen 
    To the teaching of Jehovah ---
10 That forbid the seers to see 
    And the prophets to prophesy truth. 
" Speak to us smooth things," they say, 
    " And prophesy illusions. 
11 Give over your wonted ways, 
    And leave your well-worn tracks ; 
And trouble us no more 
    With the Holy One of Israel." 

12 This therefore is the message 
    Of the Holy One of Israel : 
" Because ye reject this word, 
    And trust in guile and craft, 
    And lean your weight thereon,  
13 This guilt of yours shall be 
    Like a rift in a lofty wall, 
    That bulges, ready to fall, 
Till suddenly and swiftly 
    Down it comes with a crash 
14 A crash like that of a pitcher 
    So ruthlessly dashed in pieces, 
That not a sherd can be found 
    Among the scattered fragments 
Wherewith to take fire from the hearth, 
    Or to draw from the cistern water." 

15 For thus saith the Lord Jehovah, 
    The Holy One of Israel, 
" In calmly resting your safety lieth, 
    In quiet trust shall be your strength." 
16 But this ye refused. Ye said " No ; 
But away we will speed upon horseback." 
    Yes, speed indeed ye shall. 
" On steeds that are swift we will ride." 
    Yes, and swift shall be they that pursue you. 
17 At the menace of five ye shall flee, 
    Until only a remnant be left, 
Like a pole on the top of a mountain, 
    Or a signal upon a hill. 

\ms2 The Final Triumph and Prosperity of Jerusalem 
\s Forgiveness and Prosperity 

18 Therefore Jehovah longeth 
    To show unto you His favour, 
And therefore He ariseth 
    To reveal His pity upon you ; 
For Jehovah is God of justice : 
    Happy all who long for Him. 
19 For, O people of Zion that dwell in Jerusalem, 
    Tears shall be thine no more. 
He will show thee His gracious favour ;    
    At the (faintest) sound of thy cry, 
    He will answer thee, soon as He hears it. 
20 And though the Lord may give unto you 
    Scant measure of bread and scarceness of water, 
Yet thy Teacher no more shall withdraw, 
    But thine eyes shall behold thy Teacher. 
21 When thou swervest to right or left, 
    Thou shalt hear a voice behind thee. 
    " This is the way : walk here." 
22 And your images ye shall defile 
    Whether carved and plated with silver, 
    Or molten and covered with gold. 
Like an unclean thing thou shalt scatter them, 
    Saying to them, " Begone." 
23 Rain shall He give for thy seed, 
    Wherewith thou sovvest the ground ; 
And the wheat that springs from the ground 
    Shall rich and abundant be. 
In that day shall thy cattle 
    Graze over pastures broad. 
24 The oxen and asses that till the ground 
    Shall feast upon salted provender, 
    That with shovel and fork hath been winnowed. 
25 On every lofty mountain, 
    On every hill that is high, 
Shall be streams of running water, 
    On the day of vast slaughter and falling towers. 
26 And the moonlight shall be as the sunlight, 
    And the sun shall be sevenfold brighter than now, 
In the day that Jehovah upbindeth 
    The hurt of His people, 
    And healeth the wound that hath smitten them. 

\s The Glorious Triumph 

27 Behold, Jehovah doth come from afar 
    In thick rising clouds and with anger that blazeth, 
With lips that are filled with rage, 
    And tongue like devouring fire, 
28 With breath like a rushing torrent, 
    That reacheth even to the neck, 
To sift till the nations are sifted to nothing, 
    To bridle their jaws and to lead them to ruin. 15 

29 Then a song ye shall sing like the song 
    In the night of a holy festival ; 
And gladness of heart shall be yours, 
    As is his, who, to sound of flute, 
Setteth forth for the Mount of Jehovah, 
    To (worship) the Rock of Israel. 
30 Jehovah will utter His glorious voice, 
    He will bring down His arm in the sight of all, 
In furious indignation', 
    And flame of devouring fire, 
    In cloud-burst and rain-storm and hailstones. 
31 At the thunder-voice of Jehovah, 
    When He smiteth with the rod, 
    Shall Assyria be stricken with terror. 
32 And each stroke of the rod of destiny, 
    That Jehovah layeth upon him, 
Shall fall to the music of timbrel and lute ; 
    And with brandished arm shall He fight against them. 
33 For already a pyre is prepared,
    Constructed wide and deep, 
Piled high with blazing wood, 
    And fired by the breath of Jehovah, 
    As by a stream of brimstone. 

\ms2 The Folly of the Egyptian Alliance 
\c 31 

1 Woe to those that journey 
    To the land of Egypt for help, 
Who rely on the throngs of her horses and chariots, 
    And trust in the eminent strength of her horsemen, 
But never turn their eyes 
    To the Holy One of Israel, 
    And ask not Jehovah for counsel. 
2 Yet He too is wise, and He bringeth disaster ; 
    His threats He hath not recalled. 
He will rise to contend with the household of miscreants,
    And with those whom the wicked would summon to help them. 
3 The people of Egypt are men, not God ; 
    And their horses are flesh, not spirit. 
Let therefore Jehovah but stretch forth His hand, 
    And the helper will stumble, the holpen will fall, 
    And both shall perish together. 
4 For thus hath Jehovah declared to me : 
Like as a lion doth growl, 
    Or a young lion over his prey, 
When against him the shepherds are summoned 
    To come in all their strength ---
At the shout he is undismayed, 
    At their noise he is nothing daunted ---
So Jehovah of Hosts shall come down 
    To fight against Mount Zion, 
And against the hill thereof ; 
    5 Then like fluttering birds (shall they flee). 
Thus will Jehovah of Hosts 
    Throw His shield around Jerusalem ; 
He will shield her and deliver her, 
    He will spare her and bring her to safety. 

\ms2 The Enemy's Downfall 

6 O turn, ye men of Israel, to Him 
    Whom deeply ye have offended. 
7 In that day each will disdain 
    The gold and silver idols 
    His guilty hands have made. 
8 Assyria shall fall by no mortal sword ; 
    A sword, but not man's, shall devour him. 
From the face of that sword he shall flee, 
    And his youths shall be put to task-work. 
9 In his fear he will flee past his rocky retreat, 
    And his princes shall run from the standard in panic. 
Thus saith Jehovah whose fire is in Zion, 
    Whose furnace is in Jerusalem. 

\ms2 Rulers and People in the Coming Days 
\c 32 

1 Behold there cometh a King 
    Who shall rule in a spirit of justice, 
    And princes who govern with equity 
2 Each like a shelter from wind, 
    A refuge from storm of rain, 
Or like streamlets of water in dry parched places, 
    Or shade of great rock in a weary land. 

3 Then the eyes that see shall not be sealed, 
    And the ears that hear shall not be heedless ; 
The mind of the rash shall judge with discernment, 
    The stammering tongue shall be fluent and plain. 
5 No more shall a fool be called " noble," 
    No more shall a knave be named " princely." 

6 For the fool speaketh folly for ever, 
    His mind evermore plotteth mischief ; 
His doings are profane, 
    And error he speaks of Jehovah. 
He leaveth the hungry unsated, 
    And drink he withholds from the thirsty. 
7 The tricks of the evil are vile, 
    And villainies he planneth ---
To ruin the humble with lies, 
    And the poor, though his plea may be just. 
8 But the plans of the " noble " are noble, 
    By nobleness shall he endure. 

\ms2 Warning to the Women 

9 Ye women that are at ease, 
    Arise and hear my voice ; 
Ye carelessly confident daughters, 
    Give ear to what I say. 
10 In little more than a year 
    Ye shall shudder, for all your confidence ; 
For the vintage shall surely fail, 
    And the fruit shall not be garnered. 
11 Tremble, ye women at ease, 
    And ye that are confident, shudder ; 
Strip you, and make you bare, 
    Gird (sackcloth) upon your loins, 
12 And beat upon your breasts 
    In lament for the pleasant fields, 
    And for the fruitful vines, 
13 And for the land of my people, 
    O'ergrown with thorns and briers. 
Not a house of mirth shall be left 
    In all the jubilant city. 
14 The palace shall be forsaken, 
    The thronging city deserted ; 
Watchtower and hill shall become 
    An everlasting waste. 

\ms2 The Security and Prosperity of the Coming Days 

15 But yet from the heavenly height 
    Shall a spirit be poured upon us, 
And the desert become like a garden, 
    And the garden be counted a forest. 
16 Then justice shall dwell in the desert, 
    And righteousness live in the garden-land. 
17 Of justice the fruit shall be peace, 
    And the outcome of righteousness safety 
    And quietness for ever. 
18 My people shall dwell in the mansion of peace, 
    At easeful rest in abodes secure. 
19 The forest shall be felled, 
    And the city laid utterly low. 
20 Happy are ye that may sow 
    In a land that is all well watered, 
    Where oxen and asses may roam. 

\ms2 The Present Distress and the Future Glory of Jerusalem 
\s The Distress 
\c 33  

1 Woe to thee, spoiler, whom none hath despoiled ; 
    Thou treacherous robber, whom no one hath robbed. 
When thy spoiling is over, thou too shalt be spoiled ; 
    When thy robbing is ended, thou too shalt be robbed. 
    
    ***************************************

2 O Jehovah, be gracious to us, 

We have waited for Thee ; 
Be Thou our Arm every morning, 
Our Saviour in time of distress. 

3 At the sound of the tumult 1 the peoples are fled ; 

Thou liftest Thyself, and the nations are scattered. 

4 (Thy folk), like the locusts, shall gather the booty, 

Over it swarming, as grasshoppers swarm. 

5 The Lord is exalted, He dwelleth on high ; 

With justice and righteousness Zion He filleth, 

6 With 2 wealth of salvation and wisdom and know- 

ledge, 
With treasure that flows from the fear of Jehovah. 

7 The heroes of Ariel 3 are crying without* 

The envoys of peace shed bitter tears ; 

8 Forlorn are the highways, the wayfarer ceaseth. 
He hath broken the compact and mocked at its 

witnesses, 4 

Utterly reckless of human kind. 
99 



Isaiah 

The earth doth mourn and languish, 
Lebanon withers in shame ; 

Sharon is now like a desert, 
And Bashan and Carmel are leafless. 



The Deliverance 

10 But thus saith Jehovah, " Now / will arise ; 

Yea now, even now, I will lift Me on high. 
n Ye are pregnant with chaff, and your child shall be 
stubble, 6 

My breath shall devour you like fire. 

12 The nations shall sink through the burning to ashes, 

Like thorns cut away, that are kindled with fire. 

13 The men of far countries shall hear of My doings, 

And those that are near shall acknowledge My 
might." 

14 The sinners in Zion are filled with terror, 

And shuddering seizeth the souls profane. 
" O who can dwell with devouring fire ? 6 
Who can dwell with eternal flame ?" 

15 Who walketh in righteousness, 7 speaketh with 

honesty, 

Scorneth the gain that is won by oppression ; 
Whose hand refuseth to clutch at a bribe, 

Who stoppeth his ears at a tale of blood, 
Who closeth his eyes at the sight of evil : 

1 6 He it is that shall dwell on impregnable heights. 
On a fastness of rock shall his stronghold be, 

Where his bread is provided, his water is sure. 
100 



Isaiah 

17 Thine eyes shall behold the King in His beauty, 

They shall look on the land that stretcheth afar. 
1 8 And thus shalt thou muse on the (vanished) terror :* 
" Where is he that once weighed, that once 

counted the tribute, 
And he that once counted the towers (for assault)?" 

19 No more shalt thou look on the insolent people, 
The people of dark and difficult speech, 

Who chatter a barbarous, meaningless tongue. 

20 Look on the city of Zion, 

The home of our festal assemblies ; 
Thine eyes shall behold Jerusalem, 

As a home of ease, a tent unremaved, 
Whose pegs shall never be plucked from the ground, 

And not one of whose cords shall be snapped 
asunder. 

21 In place of broad encompassing streams 

Shall be there for our comfort Jehovah's own 

river, 9 

A river where saileth no fleet with oars, 10 
And stately galleys pass not over. 

22 For Jehovah Himself is our Judge, 

Jehovah Himself is our Marshal, 
Jehovah Himself is our King : 

It is He, He alone, that shall save us. 



Then 11 shall the blind 12 divide spoil in abundance, 
e And then shall rich plunder be seized by the lame. 
24 Nevermore shall inhabitant say, " I am sick," 
For the sins of her people are all forgiven. 

101 



THE GOLDEN AGE (xxxiv.-xxxv.) 

The Day of Vengeance 
The Destruction of the Nations 

XXXIV. 

1 Draw nigh, ye nations, and hearken ; 

Ye peoples, give attention. 
Let the earth and its fulness hearken, 
The world and all its offspring. 

2 For Jehovah is wroth with all nations, 

And angry with all their host ; 
He hath doomed them to destruction, 
Hath given them up to slaughter. 

3 Their slain shall be flung out, 

And a stench shall arise from their corpses ; 
The mountains shall run with their blood, 

4 And all the hills 1 shall dissolve. 

The heavens shall roll up like a scroll, 

And all their host shall fade 
As the leaves fade away from the vine, 

As the foliage fades from the fig-tree. 

The Destruction of Edom 

5 For already drunk with His wrath 3 

Is the sword of Jehovah in heaven. 
See ! down it descends upon Edom 
In doom on that people accursed. 8 

6 Blood-gorged is the sword of Jehovah 

It is smeared all over with fat 
102 



Isaiah 

With the blood of lambs and of goats, 4 
With the fat of the kidneys of rams. 4 

For Jehovah hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, 
Vast slaughter in Edom's land : 

7 With those shall be struck down wild oxen, 8 

And bullocks together with steers. 5 

Their land shall be drunken with blood, 
And their dust shall be smeared with fat ; 

8 For Jehovah hath set Him a day of revenge, 

And the Champion of Zion a year of requital. 

9 Her streams shall be turned into pitch, 

And the dust of the land into brimstone ; 
Her land shall be turned into pitch, 
That burneth night and day. 

10 It shall not be quenched for ever, 

Her smoke shall go up through the ages ; 
A waste she shall lie evermore, 
To be crossed by no traveller for ever 

1 1 The haunt of the pelican and bittern, 

The home of the owl and the raven : 
Jehovah will stretch out upon her 
The measuring-line of Chaos, 
And the plummet of Destruction. 

12 Satyrs shall dwell therein, 8 

Her nobles shall cease to be ; 
No kingdom shall there be proclaimed, 
And her princes shall be no more. 

13 Where her palaces were, shall spring thorns ; 

In her fortresses, nettles and thistles. 
A haunt shall she be for jackals, 
A place for the camping of ostriches. 
103 



Isaiah 

14 Wild cats shall join the hyenas, 

And satyrs shall meet with their fellows ; 
There only the night-hag reposeth, 
And findeth her place of rest. 

15 There the arrow-snake nestles and lays, 

There she broodeth and hatcheth her eggs ; 
There only the vultures gather 
Not one without its mate. 

16 Search in the Book of Jehovah 7 

Not one of all these is missing ; 
For Jehovah's own lips have commanded, 
And His is the breath that hath gathered them. 

17 He hath assigned it by lot to them, 8 

His is the hand that apportioned it, 
As their everlasting possession, 
Their home through all the ages. 

The Joy of the Redeemed 

XXXV. 

1 Let the desert and parched land rejoice, 

Let the steppe-land exult and burst forth ; 
Let it burst into bloom like narcissus, 
And ring with glad cries of rejoicing, 

2 All dowered with the glory of Lebanon, 

The splendour of Carmel and Sharon : 
They 1 shall witness Jehovah's own glory, 
The majesty of our God. 

3 Strengthen the hands that hang down, 

And the tottering knees make firm ; 

4 Tell ye the wild-beating hearts 

To be strong and unafraid. 
104 



Isaiah 

Behold ! your God is coming, 

He will surely avenge His people ; 

God is coming in retribution, 

He Himself is coming to save you. 

5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, 

The ears of the deaf unstopped ; 

6 Then the lame shall leap like a hart 

And the tongue of the dumb shall sing. 

For waters break out in the desert, 
And torrents in the wilderness ; 

7 The parched land becometh a pool, 

And the thirsty land springs of water. 

In the haunts of (wild cats and of) jackals 
(Your flocks and your herds) shall rest, 

And the court (where the ostriches camp)' 
Shall be filled with reeds and rushes. 

8 And there a pure highway shall rise, 

To be called " The Holy Way." ; 
The unclean shall not pass over it, 1 
Fools shall not wander therein. 

9 No lion shall be there, 

No ravenous beast shall ascend it ; 
But there shall the ransomed walk, 
Yea, Jehovah's redeemed shall come home. 

10 They shall come unto Zion with singing ; 

And crowned with unending joy ; 
For at last joy and gladness have found 4 them, 
And sorrow and sighing are fled. 



HISTORICAL APPENDIX 1 (xxxvi.-xxxix.) 

Isaiah Encourages Hezekiah to Resist Sennacherib's 
Summons to Surrender Jerusalem 

First Narrative* 
xxxvi. 

1 In the fourteenth year of the reign of Hezekiah, 8 
Sennacherib, King of Assyria, after having assaulted 
and captured all the fortified cities of Judah, 

2 despatched his Chief Officer 4 from Lachish with 
a large force against King Hezekiah in Jerusalem. 
Near the conduit of the upper pool, where he had 
taken up his position on the Fuller's Field Road,* 

3 he was visited by a deputation consisting of 
Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, Governor of the Palace, 
Shebna 6 the Secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, 
the Recorder. 

4 The Chief Officer began : " This is the message 
from the Great King, the King of Assyria : I desire 

5 you to deliver it to Hezekiah. ' What sort of con- 
fidence is this that you cherish ? Do you imagine 
that in war a mere word of the lips is the equivalent 
of wisdom and strength ? Now who is it you are 

6 trusting in, that you presume to rebel against me ? 
Of course you are trusting to Egypt, that staff of 
broken reed, which will enter and pierce the hand 
of the man that leans upon it : that is all that 
Pharaoh King of Egypt will prove to those who 

7 trust to him. If, however, you tell me you are 

1 06 



Isaiah 

trusting to your God Jehovah, why, that is the very 
god whose sanctuaries and altars Hezekiah has 
abolished/ commanding the people of Judah and 
Jerusalem to confine their worship to the altar at this 

8 place ? Now, make a wager, if you like, with my 
lord the King of Assyria : I am prepared to furnish 
you with two thousand horses, if you on your part 

9 can supply them with riders. (But if you cannot), 
how do you propose to repel the onset of one of the 
least of my lord's officers ? yet you trust to Egypt 

10 for chariots and horsemen. And now do you 
imagine that I have not Jehovah's sanction for 
invading this land with a view to its destruction ? 
Why, it is Jehovah Himself who commissioned me 
to invade this land and destroy it.' " 

11 Thereupon Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah asked the 
Chief Officer to be good enough not to 'speak 
to them in Hebrew, in the hearing of the people on 
the wall, but in Aramaic, which they assured him 

12 they understood. " Nay,",replied the Officer, " it is 
not to your lord and yourself that my lord has sent 
me with this message, butjprecisely to the men on the 
wall, whom your policy is likely to reduce to eating 
their own filth and drinking their own water." 

13 Then the Chief Officer came forward and cried 
aloud in Hebrew, " Listen to the words of the 

14 Great King, the King of Assyria. Thus saith the 
King : Do not let yourselves be imposed upon by 

15 Hezekiah, for he is powerless to deliver you ; and 
do not let yourselves be induced to trust to Jehovah 
by Hezekiah's assurances that Jehovah will unques- 
tionably save you, and that this city will not be 
delivered into the hands of the King of Assyria. 

107 



Isaiah 

16 Give Jio heed to Hezekiah ; for thus saith the King 
of Assyria to you, Make your peace with me and 
surrender, and then everyone shall eat of his own 
vine and fig-tree, and drink water from his own 

17 cistern, till I come and take you to a land like your 
own a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and 

1 8 vineyards. Do not let Hezekiah delude you with 
assurances that Jehovah will save you. Has the god 
of any nation ever rescued his land from the grasp 

19 of the King of Assyria ? Where are the gods 
of Hamath and Arpad ? where are the gods of 
Sepharvaim ? And where are the gods of the land 
of Samaria ? 8 Have they rescued Samaria from 

20 his grasp ? Which of all these national gods has 
succeeded in rescuing his land from my grasp, that 
Jehovah should now rescue Jerusalem from my 

21 grasp ?" To this they answered not a word, they 
remained silent ; for the King had expressly told 

22 them not to answer him. Then Eliakim the son of 
Hilkiah, Governor of the Palace, and Shebna the 
Secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, the Recorder, 
tore their garments, and returned to Hezekiah, 

xxxvii. telling him what the Chief Officer had said. 

1 When King Hezekiah heard this, he tore his 
garments, covered himself with sackcloth, and went 

2 into the Temple ; and he despatched Eliakim, 
Governor of the Palace, and Shebna the Secretary, 
and the elders of the priests, all covered with sack- 

3 cloth, to the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, to 
whom they spoke as follows : "A message from 
Hezekiah ! This is a day of trouble, chastisement, 
and disgrace : for children are come to the birth, 

4 and there is not strength to bear them. But it may 

108 



Isaiah 

be that Jehovah thy God will hear the words of the 
Chief Officer, whom the King of Assyria, his master, 
has sent to insult the living God, and will punish the 
word which Jehovah thy God has heard : so lift up 
5,6 thy prayer for those that remain." And this was 
the answer that Isaiah returned to the deputation of 
King Hezekiah's ministers : " Tell your master," he 
said, " that Jehovah's message to him is this : he is 
not to be afraid of the blasphemous words he has 
heard from the minions of the King of Assyria. 

7 ' Behold,' saith He, ' I will inspire him with such a 
spirit (of panic) that on the strength of a rumour 
he will return to his own land, and there, in his own 
land, I will cause him to fall a victim to the 
sword.' " 

8 Then the Chief Officer returned and found the 
King of Assyria engaged in the siege of Libnah , 
for he had heard that he had moved his camp from 

90 Lachish. When the news reached him that 
Tirhakah King of Ethiopia was advancing to give 
him battle. . . . 

37 So Sennacherib, King of Assyria, broke up camp 

38 and returned to Nineveh, where he settled. Subse- 
quently, as he was worshipping in the temple of 
Nisroch his god, he was assassinated by his sons 
Adrammelech and Sharezer. They, however, made 
good their escape to Armenia, and he was succeeded 
by Esar-haddon his son. 

Second Narrative 

96 Then he sent messengers to Hezekiah with the 
10 following instructions. " This," said he, " is 
what you are to say to Hezekiah King of Judah, 
109 



Isaiah 

Do not let the god you trust in delude you with his 
assurance that Jerusalem will not be delivered into 

11 the hands of the King of Assyria. You are well 
aware of the ruin the King of Assyria has brought 

12 upon all lands, and are you to escape ? Were the 
nations which my father destroyed saved by their 
gods Gozan and Haran and Rezeph and the 

13 Edenites in Telassar ? Where is the King of 
Hamath and the King of Arpad and the King of the 
city of Sepharvaim, of Hena and Ivvah ?" 

14 Hezekiah received the letter at the hands of the 
messengers and read it ; then he went up to the 

15 Temple and spread it before Jehovah, and to 

16 Jehovah thus he prayed': "O Jehovah of Hosts, 
Thou God of Israel, enthroned upon the cherubim, 
Thou art God alone over all the kingdoms of the 
earth : Thou art the Creator of heaven and earth. 

17 Incline Thine ear, O Jehovah, and hear; open 
Thine eyes, O Jehovah, and see; and hear the 
message of Sennacherib which he has sent to insult 

18 the living God. True it is, O Jehovah, that the 
Kings of Assyria have devoted all nations and 

19 their lands to destruction, and thrust their gods in 
the fire, for no gods were they at all, but wood and 
stone, fashioned by human hands, and so they were 

20 destroyed. But now, O Jehovah our God, save us 
from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth 
may know that Thou alone, O Jehovah, art God." 

21 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent this answer 
back to Hezekiah : " Thus saith Jehovah the God of 
Israel : I have heard x thy prayer concerning 

22 Sennacherib, King of Assyria. This is the word of 
Jehovah concerning him : 

no 



Isaiah 

The virgin, the daughter of Zion, 
Contemns thee and mocks thee ; 

Behind thee Jerusalem's daughter 
Is shaking her head. 

23 Against whom hast thou lifted thy voice 

In reviling and blasphemy ? 
Yea, thine eyes thou hast lifted to heaven 
Against Israel's Holy One. 

24 Thou hast reviled, by thy minions, 

The Lord, and hast said, 
" With my chariots I climb the high hills, 

The recesses of Lebanon ; 
Her towering cedars I fell, 

And her cypresses choice ; 
And I pierce to her furthest retreat, 
Where the forest is thickest. 

25 Wells, too, (in the desert) I dig, 

And I drink of strange 2 waters ; 

With the sole of my foot I dry up 

All the Nile-streams of Egypt." 

26 Hast thou not heard that all this 

I prepared long ago ? 
From of old I had planned it, and now 

I have brought it to pass 3 : 
So 'tis thine to lay fortified cities 

In desolate heaps. 

27 Their inhabitants, impotent all, 

Are dismayed and confounded, 
Become like the grass of the field, 

Like the green tender grass ; 
They are like unto grass on the roofs 

That the east wind hath blasted. 4 
in 



Isaiah 

28 Thy sitting and rising I know,' 
And thy going and coming ; 
39 Thy raging and uproar against Me 

Are come to Mine ears. 
So My ring I will put through thy nose 

And My bit in thy lips, 8 
And (thus led) I will make thee return 
By the way that thou earnest. 

30 And the sign unto thee shall be this : 

This year ye shall eat that which grows of itself, 
And the next that which springeth therefrom ; 

But the third ye shall sow and reap, 
Plant vineyards and eat of their fruit. 

31 And those that escape of the household of Judah 

Shall again take root downward, and upward 
bear fruit ; 

32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, 

And forth from Mount Zion all such as escape. 
The zeal of Jehovah of Hosts 
Shall bring this thing to pass. 7 

33 Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning the King 

of Assyria? 
He shall not come into this city, 

Nor shoot an arrow there ; 
He shall not come before it with shield, 

Nor cast up a mound against it. 

34 But back he shall go by the way that he came, 

And into this city he shall not enter ; 

35 For I will protect and deliver this city, 

For Mine own sake and David My servant's sake. 

36 Then the angel of Jehovah went forth and slew 
in the camp of Assyria one hundred and eighty-five 

112 



Isaiah 

thousand men : when they rose in the morning, 8 
behold I every man was a lifeless corpse. 



Hezekiah's Sickness, Recovery, and Song of 
Thanksgiving 

Hezekiah's Sickness 1 
xxxviii. 

1 In those days Hezekiah was seized with a mortal 
sickness : and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz 
came to him and said, " Jehovah commands you to 
set your household affairs in order ; for you will 

2 not recover, you are to die." Then, turning his 
face to the wall, Hezekiah offered this prayer to 

3 Jehovah : " Remember, O Jehovah, I beseech Thee, 
how I have lived in Thy presence with a faithful 
and undivided heart, and done the thing that 
pleased Thee." And Hezekiah wept bitterly. Then 

4 there came to Isaiah this message from Jehovah, 

5 " Go and say to Hezekiah : Thussaith Jehovah, the 
God of David thy father, ' I have heard thy prayer, 
I have seen thy tears ; I will add to thy life fifteen 

6 years more. Thee and this city together I will 
rescue from the grasp of the King of Assyria, and 

21 this city I will protect' " Then 2 Isaiah said, " Let 
them take a cake of figs and press it on the boil, to 

22 ensure his recovery." And Hezekiah said, " What 
is the sign that I shall yet go up to the Temple ?" 

7 " Take this," he replied, " as a sign from Jehovah 

8 that He will do what He has promised. Watch the 
shadow that the descending sun has cast on the 
step-clock of Ahaz : I will bring that shadow ten 

113 H 



Isaiah 

steps backward." And the sun did indeed go 
back on the step-clock the ten steps it had gone 
down. 

Hezekiah's Song of Thanksgiving 

9 A psalm 8 of Hezekiah King of Judah, to celebrate 
his recovery from the sickness which had overtaken 
him : 

10 Methought I was doomed to depart 

When my life was at noon-tide 
Consigned to the portals of Sheol 
The rest of my years. 

11 I had thought to see Jah nevermore 

In the land of the living, 
And never again to behold 
Any man in this world. 

12 Like the tent of a shepherd, my home 

Is plucked up and stripped from me ; 
He hath rolled up my life like a web, 

From the thrum He hath cut me. 
To pain I am doomed night and day, 

13 And I cry till the morning, 
While all my bones, like a lion 

He crusheth in pieces. 4 

14 I scream as screameth a swift, 

Like a dove do I moan ; 
Mine eyes look tearfully heavenward : 
O think on me, Lord, be my surety. 

15 What can I utter or say, 

Since 'tis He that hath done it. 
I toss all the time of my slumber 
My soul is so bitter. 

114 



Isaiah 

16 O rest Thou my spirit, refresh me, 5 

And let me recover. 

17 'Tis Thou" that hast kept my soul 

From the pit of destruction. 
Behind Thy back Thou hast cast 
Mine iniquities all. 

1 8 For Sheol can give Thee no thanks, 

Nor can Death sing Thy praises ; 
And they that go down to the pit 
Cannot hope for Thy love. 7 

19 Tis the living, the living, that praise Thee, 

As I do this day. 

So the father shall tell to his sons 
Of Thy faithfulness sure. 

20 Be pleased, O Jehovah, to save us : 

Then all the days of our life 
We shall play upon instruments stringed 
In front of the house of Jehovah. 

Hezekiah's Vanity and Isaiah's Rebuke 
xxxix. 

1 At that time, Merodach-baladan the son of 
Baladan, King of Babylon, having heard that 
Hezekiah had been ill and had recovered, despatched 

2 eunuchs 1 to him with a present. Hezekiah, de- 
lighted, proceeded to display to them his treasure- 
house, the silver, the gold, the spices, the fine oil, 
the armoury, and the whole range of his treasures : 
there was nothing in his palace or indeed in all his 
dominion that Hezekiah did not show them. 

3 Then came the prophet Isaiah to King Hezekiah 
and said, " Where do these men come from, and 

"5 



Isaiah 

what have they said ?" " They have come," said 
Hezekiah, " from a distant land, from Babylon." 

4 " What have they seen in your palace ?" said Isaiah ; 
and Hezekiah answered, " Everything : there is none 
of my treasures that I have not shown them." 

5 " Listen, then," said Isaiah, " to the word of Jehovah 

6 of Hosts. Mark, the day is coming, when all that 
is in your palace, and all the treasures that your 
ancestors have hitherto amassed, shall be carried to 

7 Babylon : nothing shall be left, saith Jehovah. And 
of the sons that may yet be born to you, some shall 
be taken to become eunuchs in the palace of the 

8 King of Babylon." Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, 
" I accept 2 the word of Jehovah which you have 
spoken." At least, thought he, there will be peace 
and stability in my day. 



116 



THE EXILES' BOOK OF CONSOLATION 1 (xl.-lv.) 

JEHOVAH THE OMNIPOTENT IS ABOUT TO USHER IN 
THE DAY OF ISRAEL'S DELIVERANCE (xl.-xlviii.) 

JEHOVAH IS LORD OF NATORE AND HISTORY (xl. and xli.) 

The Glorious News Redemption is Nigh 
xl. 

1 "Comfort ye, comfort My people," 

Declareth your God; 

2 "Speak home to the heart of Jerusalem, 

Cry unto her 
That her time of sore service is over, 

Her guilt is discharged ; 
For her sins she hath doubly atoned 

At the hand of Jehovah." 

3 Hark I Saith a voice, " In the wilderness 

Clear ye a way for Jehovah ; 
Make ye straight in the desert 
A highway for our God. 

4 Let every valley be raised, 

Every mountain and hill brought low ; 
Let the steep rugged ground become level, 
The rough rocky ridges a plain. 

5 Then Jehovah shall show forth His glory, 

And all flesh shall see it together : 
The mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it." 

6 Hark ! Saith a voice, " Proclaim." 
" What shall I proclaim ?" said L* 

14 Proclaim that all flesh is grass, 

All its grace as the flower of the field. 
117 



Isaiah 

7 The grass doth wither, the flower doth fade, 

When upon it the breath of Jehovah 3 hath blown. 4 

8 Yea, the grass doth wither, the flower doth fade ; 

But the word of our God shall stand for ever." 

9 Get thee up to a mountain high, 

Thou that tellest good tidings to Zion ; 
Lift up thy voice with strength, 

Thou that bringest good news to Jerusalem ; 

Lift it up, be not afraid. 
Say to the cities of Judah, 

" Yonder cometh your God." 

10 See ! Jehovah is coming in might, 

With an arm that ensures His dominion. 
Behold, His reward is with Him, 
His recompense is before Him. 

11 He feedeth His flock like a shepherd, 

He gathereth it with His arm ; 
He carrieth the lambs in His bosom, 
And those that give suck He leadeth. 



The Sovereignty and Omnipotence of God as Seen 
in Nature 

12 Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his 

hand ? 

Who hath ruled off the heavens with a span, 
Comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, 
And weighed the mountains in scales, 

And the hills in a balance ? 

13 Who hath directed the mind 6 of Jehovah ? 

And where is the counsellor that taught Him ? 
118 



Isaiah 

14 Whom did He ask for enlightenment ? 
Who taught Him the pathway of right, 

Or showed Him the way of true insight ? 

15 See ! nations are nought but a drop on a bucket, 

They count but as dust on a balance ; 
He lifteth the isles like a mote. 

1 6 Too small for the fires (of His altars) is Lebanon, 

Too few are its beasts for an offering. 6 

17 All nations are nothing before Him, 

He counts them but empty nothing. 

18 So to whom will ye liken God, 

Or what likeness set over against Him ? 

19 An image ! A craftsman hath cast it, 
xli. A goldsmith o'erlaid it with gold. 7 

6 Each workman helpeth his fellow, 

And saith to his neighbour, " Set to." 

7 So the craftsman heartens the goldsmith, 

The polisher says to the finisher, 
" Fine piece of soldering that !" 
xl. Then he nails down the statue securely. 

20 And he who would carve a wood image 8 

Makes choice of a wood that decays not ; 
Then he seeketh a craftsman of skill, 
To erect for him an image, 
That is warranted not to topple. 9 

21 But know ye not then of yourselves, or from 

hearsay ? 

Hath this from the first not been told you ? 
Of this have ye not been aware, 

Since the day that the world was founded ? 
119 



Isaiah 

22 It is He that sits throned on the vault of the earth, 

So high that the dwellers thereon are like 

locusts ; 

That stretcheth the heavens across like a veil, 
And spreadeth them out like a tent to dwell in. 

23 It is He that reduceth proud princes to nothing, 

That turneth the rulers of earth into nothing. 

24 Scarce are they planted, and scarce are they sown, 

And scarce hath their stock taken root in the 

earth, 

When He bloweth upon them, and so they wither : 
The whirlwind bears them away like chaff. 

25 To whom will ye liken Me, then ? 

And who is My match ? saith the Holy One. 

26 Lift up your eyes on high ; 

See ! who hath created all those ? 10 
He who bringeth their host out by number, 

And summoneth each by his name : 
So great His resource and so mighty His power 

That not one of them faileth to answer. 

27 Why sayest thou, then, O Jacob, 

And Israel, why maintain 
That thy lot is unknown to Jehovah, 
Thy right ignored by thy God ? 

28 Knowest thou not of thyself or by hearsay 
Jehovah is God eternal, 

Creator of all the earth ? 

He fainteth not, neither is weary, 
Unsearchable is His wisdom ; 

29 He giveth power to the weary, 

And increase of strength to the feeble. 

I2O 



Isaiah 

30 Youths may faint and grow weary, 

And young men may stumble and fall ; 

31 But those that wait for Jehovah 

Shall find their strength renewed ; 
They shall put forth pinions like eagles. 
They shall run, and not grow weary ; 
They shall walk, and not be faint. 



The Sovereignty of God as Seen in History, and 
Especially in the Rise of Cyrus (xli.) 

The Rise of Cyrus a Proof of Jehovah 1 s Power 
xli. 

1 Hearken in silence, ye coast-lands, to Me, 

And await, ye nations, Mine argument : l 
Come hither, then state your case ; 

So let us approach the tribunal together. 

2 Who raised up him* from the east land, 

Whose steps are attended by victory, 
Sweeping the nations before him, 
And laying kings low at his feet ? 

His sword doth make them like dust 
And his bow like the driven stubble ; 

3 He pursueth and passeth unharmed, 

Nor toucheth the ground with his feet. 3 

4 Who is He that hath wrought and accomplished 

this? 

It is He that from the beginning 
Did summon the generations 
Even I, Jehovah, the First, 
And with the Last am I. 
121 



Isaiah 

The coast-lands have seen it and feared, 
The ends of the earth fell a-trembling, 
They came and drew nigh (to the judgment). 



Israel -is Jehovah's Servant, Loved and Upheld by Him 

8 But 4 thou, Israel My Servant, 

Jacob, whom I have chosen, 

The offspring of Abraham My friend ; 

9 Whom I fetched from the ends of the earth, 

And called from the corners thereof, 
With the words, " My Servant art thou; 
I have chosen, and not since rejected thee." 

10 Fear not, for I am with thee ; 

Dread nothing, for I am thy God : 
I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee ; 
My victorious hand will uphold thee. 

1 1 See ! all that are furious against thee 

Shall end in shame and confusion ; 

The men that contended against thee 

Shall pass into nothing and perish. 

12 The men that have striven against thee 

Thou never shalt find, though thou seek them ; 
The men that are warring against thee 
Shall wholly and utterly vanish. 

13 For I, Jehovah thy God, 

Have hold of thy right hand : 
I say to thee, " Never fear, 
For I Myself am thy helper." 

14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, 

Thou tiny worm 5 Israel ; 
122 



Isaiah 

Jehovah saith, I am thy helper ; 

Thy Redeemer is Israel's Holy One. 

15 A threshing-sledge, see ! I will make of thee, 

New and well-furnished with teeth ; 
Thou shalt thresh the mountains to powder, 
The hills thou shalt make like chaff. 

16 The wind, when thou winnowest, shall scatter 

them, 

The whirlwind shall bear them away ; 
But thou shalt rejoice in Jehovah, 
And glory in Israel's Holy One. 

17 The poor who seek water where water is none, 

The needy whose tongue is parched with thirst 
I, Jehovah, will hear their prayer, 

I, who am Israel's God, will not leave them. 

1 8 But streams on the hills I will open, 

And springs in the midst of the valleys ; 
The desert will I turn into pools of water, 

The land that is parched into fountains of water. 

19 I will plant in the desert the cedar, 

Acacia, myrtle, and olive ; 
I will set in the wilderness fir-trees, 
The plane and the cypress together : 

20 That men may see and acknowledge, 

Consider and understand, 
That this is the work of Jehovah's own hand, 
The creation of Israel's Holy One. 



123 



Isaiah 

No Heathen God Can Predict the Future 

21 Now then, saith Jehovah, 6 bring forward your suit, 

Produce your idols, 7 saith Jacob's King. 

22 Let them come and declare unto us 

The things that are yet to happen ; 
Declare how the past was foretold, 

That we may give thought thereto. 
Or announce what is yet to come, 

That we may mark the issue ; 

23 Declare what shall be hereafter, 

And then we shall know ye are gods. 
Yea, do aught that ye please, good or ill, 
That may strike us with awe to behold. 

24 Now see, ye are nothing, and nought can ye do : 

Hateful is he that doth choose you. 

No Heathen God, but Jehovah Alone, Predicted the Advent 
of Cyrus 

25 I have roused up one 8 from the north, he is come 

Even one from the sunrise who calls on My 

name ; 

He shall trample on princes like mortar, 
As potter doth trample the clay. 

26 But who from the first hath announced this, 

That so we might recognize it ? 
Or who hath aforetime declared it, 

That now we must own to its truth ? 
There was none that announced or declared it, 

Not one heard a word from you. 

27 It was I who first told it to Zion, 9 

And gave the glad news to Jerusalem. 
124 



Isaiah 

28 I looked all around there was no one ; 

Not one of the gods could give counsel 
Or answer, to aught that I asked them. 

29 See ! one and all they are nothing, 

And nothing can they do : 
Their idols are wind and waste. 



THE SERVANT (ISRAEL), HIS TASK AND DESTINY (xlii. I-xliv. 23) 

The Servant's Task 
xlii. 

1 Behold ! 

My Servant, 1 whom I uphold ; 

My Chosen, the joy of My soul. 
I hcive put My spirit upon him ; 

He shall publish (My) Law 3 to the nations. 

2 He shall not cry, nor shout, 

Nor utter his voice in the streets ; 

3 Not a reed that is bent shall he break, 

Nor a wick that burns dim shall he quench. 

He shall faithfully set forth (My) Law, 

4 All erect and aglow shall he be : 

He shall yet set (My) Law in the earth, 
And the islands shall wait for his teaching. 

5 Thus saith Jehovah, the God 

Who spread out and stretched forth the heavens ; 
Who created the earth and its fruits, 
Giving breath to the people upon it, 
And spirit to them that tread it : 
"5 



Isaiah 

6 With full and deliberate purpose* 1 

Have I Jehovah called thee, 

And taken thy hand in Mine ; 
I formed thee as pledge and symbol 

Of My covenant with mankind 
A light to enlighten the nations, 

7 To open the eyes of the blind, 

A nd to bring from the dungeon the captives 
Who sit in the darkness of prison. 

8 I am the (true) God, 4 Jehovah ; 

This is the name that is Mine : 
And My glory I yield to no other, 
My praise shall no image enjoy. 

9 Behold, the predictions of old are fulfilled, 

And new things I now declare ; 
Before they spring into being, 
I make them known unto you. 

The New Song 

10 Sing a new song to Jehovah, 

His praise from the end of the earth ; 
Let the sea and its fulness roar, 6 
The islands and those that dwell there. 

11 Let the desert rejoice with her cities, 

The villages Kedar 6 inhabits ; 
Let Sela's 7 inhabitants sing, 
Let them shout from the top of the mountains. 

12 Let them give to Jehovah glory, 

And tell forth His praise in the islands. 

13 Jehovah goes forth like a hero, 

He stirreth His rage like a warrior ; 
He shouteth His fierce battle-cry, 
He engageth His foes like a hero. 
126 



Isaiah 



Jehovah at last Bestirs Himself 

14 Long time have I held My peace, 

And restrained Myself in silence ; 
But now, like a woman in travail, 
I groan, I pant and gasp. 

15 Mountains and hills I will waste, 

I will dry up all their herbage ; 
The streams I will turn into sand, 
And the pools I will clean dry up. 

16 The blind I will lead and guide, 

By ways and by paths unfamiliar ; 
Their gloom I will turn into light, 

And the ground that is rough I will level 
These are the things I will do, 

They shall not be left undone. 

17 But those that put trust in an idol, 

And call an image their god, 

Shall backward be driven in shame. 



A Call for Repentance on Israel's Part 

1 8 Hearken, ye that are deaf ; 

And ye blind, look up, that ye see : 

19 Who is blind but My Servant, 

And who is deaf as My Messenger ? 
Who is blind as Mine Envoy, 8 
And deaf 9 as Jehovah's Servant ? 

20 Much have ye seen that ye marked not ; 

Your ears, though open, were deaf. 

21 Jehovah was pleased, for His righteousness' sake, 

To make His instruction great and glorious. 
127 



Isaiah 

22 Yet 10 it is still a people 

Plundered and despoiled, 
All of them snared in dungeons, 

And hidden away in prisons 
A prey without prospect of rescue, 

A spoil of which none saith " Restore." 

23 Which of you now will give ear unto this, 

Will attend and hear for the time to come ? 

24 Who gave up Jacob to plunderers, 

And Israel to them that despoiled him, 11 

25 And poured His hot anger upon him, 

In fury of war so intense 

That it blazed round about him he knew not why 
And it burned him, yet never to heart did he lay 
it? 

Jehovah will Show His Love for Israel by Gathering 

her Exiles Home 
xliii. 

1 But now thus saith Jehovah, 

Thy Creator, O Jacob, thy Maker, O Israel 
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, 
And called thee by name : thou art Mine. 

2 When thou passest through waters, then I will be 

with thee ; 

No rivers shall bear thee away in their flood : 
When thou walkest through fire, thou shalt no wise 

be scorched, 
And the flames shall not kindle upon thee. 

3 For I am Jehovah thy God, 

Thy Deliverer, Israel's Holy One ; 
Egypt I give 1 as thy ransom, 
Yea, Seba and Cush 2 in thy stead 
128 



I^uiah 

4 Because in My sight thou art precious, 

Both honoured and beloved, 
Those lands* I will give as thy ransom, 
Those peoples in thy stead. 

5 Therefore fear not, for I am with thee. 

I will bring thy seed from the sunrise, 
And gather thee out of the sunset ; 

6 I will say to the north, " Give them up ;" 

And unto the south, " Withhold them not." 
Bring in My sons from afar, 
And My daughters from the ends of the earth 

7 Every one that is called by My name, 

Whom I fashioned and made for My glory. 

Israel is Jehovah's Witness to the World 

8 Forth ! ye folk* that have eyes, but are blind ; 

And ye that have ears, yet are deaf. 

9 The nations are all assembled, 

The peoples are gathered together. 
Which of them all can declare such a thing, 6 

Or announce to us such in advance ? 
Let them prove themselves right by the witness 
they bring, 

Who shall say, when they hear, " It is true." 

10 But ye are My Witnesses thus saith Jehovah- 
My Servants, whom I have chosen, 
That they 8 may acknowledge and trust Me, 

And learn I am ever the same. 
No god was formed before Me, 
And after Me shall be none. 

129 i 



Isaiah 

ii I, even I, am Jehovah, 

And Saviour beside Me is none. 



12 It was I, and no strange god among you, 

Who announced and declared and delivered. 
Ye are My witnesses thus saith Jehovah 
And I am God from of old, 

13 From henceforth ever the same. 

There is none that can snatch from My hand, 
And who can reverse what I do ? 



The Deliverance from Babylon more Wonderful than 
the Deliverance from Egypt 

14 Thus saith Jehovah, your Redeemer, 

The Holy One of Israel : 
For your sake I send unto Babylon, 

And down will I bring them in flight. 
I will lay the Chaldeans low, 

And turn their rejoicing to mourning ; 7 

15 For I am Jehovah, your Holy One, 

The Creator of Israel, your King. 

1 6 Thus saith Jehovah, 

Who of old made a way through the Sea, 8 
And a path through the mighty waters ; 

17 Who chariot and horse led forth, 

The warriors and war-host together 
They lay down, but they rose no more, 

They were quenched and put out like a wick 

18 Think of those old things no more, 

Nor give heed to those deeds of the old time. 
130 



Isaiah 

19 For see ! I am doing a new thing, 

Already it springeth to view : 
Do ye not recognize it ? 

Yea, a path I will make through the desert, 
And rivers in the wilderness ; 

20 The wild beasts shall render Me honour, 

The jackals and the ostriches. 
For with water I dower the desert, 

The wilderness with streams, 
To yield drink to My chosen people, 

21 The people I formed for Myself, 
To tell abroad My praise. 

Israel's Restoration is Due, not to her own Merits, 
but to Jehovah's Free Grace 

22 Yet thou hast not called upon Me? O Jacob, 

Nor wearied thyself about Me, O Israel. 

23 Thou hast not brought unto Me 

Burnt offerings of sheep, 

Nor didst honour Me with thy sacrifice. 

I burdened thee not with offerings, 
Nor wearied thee with frankincense ; 

24 Thou boughtest Me no sweet cane with thy 

money, 

Thou satedst Me not with the fat of thy sacrifice. 
But thou by thy sins hast burdened Me, 
And through thy transgressions hast wearied Me. 

25 Yet I, even I, am He 

That blotteth out thy transgressions ; 10 
Thy sins I remember no more. 



Isaiah 

26 Call to My mind thy merits, 

Let us urge our several pleas ; 
Reckon up all that thou canst, 
To prove thyself in the right. 

27 Thine ancient sire 11 was a sinner, 

Thy prophets 18 were rebels against Me, 

28 My Temple thy princes profaned ; 13 
So Jacob I gave to destruction, 

.. And Israel to reviling. 

1 Yet hear now, Jacob My Servant, 

And Israel, whom I have chosen ; 

2 Thus saith Jehovah thy Maker, 

Who formed thee and helped thee from birth : 
Fear not, Jacob My Servant ; 
Jeshurun, 1 whom I have chosen : 

3 For water I will pour on the thirsty, 

And rills on the ground that is dry, 

On thy sons I will pour out My spirit, 
My blessing upon their offspring : 

4 And then shall they grow like the grass among 

waters, 2 
Like willows by water-courses. 

5 And one 3 shall declare, " I belong to Jehovah ;" 

Another shall call himself Jacob : 
Another shall write on his hand, 4 " To Jehovah," 
And add to his own name the surname of Israel. 

Israel's God is Sovereign and Eternal 

6 Thus saith Jehovah, the King of Israel, 

His Redeemer, Jehovah of Hosts : 
I am the First, I too am the Last, 
Beside Me is no god at all. 
132 



Isaiah 

7 Who is like Me ? Let him stand and proclaim 6 

And declare it and set it in order before Me ? 
Who hath announced from of old things to come ? 6 
Let them tell us the things that shall yet come to 
pass. 

8 Be not disquieted, be not afraid : 

Have not I from the old time proclaimed and 

declared it ? 

Ye are my Witnesses : is there a God 
Or a Rock beside Me at all ? 7 

The Folly of Idolatry 

9 Makers of idols 8 are all an illusion, 

And profitless all are the idols they dote on ; 
No vision or insight have those who adore them, 
And so in the end they shall come but to shame. 

10 (The fool who believes) he hath fashioned a god, 

Hath but fashioned a profitless metal image. 

11 The magical arts are all put to shame, 

The words of enchantment are only human. 
The worshippers all, when they stand assembled, 
Shall tremble and come to confusion together. 

12 The smith prepareth it 9 over the coals, 

And into the shape that is fitting he hammers it, 
Working it up with his sturdy arm. 
Then hunger comes over him feeble he groweth, 
Or faint, if so be that he drinketh no water. 

13 The carpenter stretcheth his measuring-line, 

With a stylus he traceth the shape of the image, 
And carves it with tools into human likeness, 
A fair human likeness, to rest in a chapel. 

14 Forth a man goeth to cut himself timber ; 

From the forest he chooseth a plane or an oak, 
Which the Lord 10 did plant, and the rain hath nourished, 
For men to make use of as fuel for kindling. 

133 



Isaiah 

15 He sets it ablaze and he warmeth himself, 

Or he kindleth a fire, and baketh bread ; 
Or he maketh it into a god and bows down to it, 
Fashions an image and falls down before it. 

16 One half of the wood in the fire he burns, 

Then he roasteth flesh on the embers therefrom ; u 
Whereafter he eateth the roast to his fill, 

Then he warmeth himself, and he saith, " Ha ! ha ! 

Now I am warm, I feel the glow." 
X^ The rest of it then he makes into a god 

To an image, and bows down prostrate before it. 
He prayeth to it, and his prayer is this : 
" Deliver thou me, for thou art my god." 

1 8 No insight hath he, and no power of discernment, 

His eyes are besmeared, that he cannot see, 
And his mind is sealed past understanding. 

19 He suffereth never his thoughts to ponder, 

He hath not the sense or the insight to say, 
" One half thereof in the fire I have burned, 

And bread I have baked on the embers therefrom ; 
Flesh I have roasted and eaten : and then 
Of the rest shall I make a detestable image, 
And bow myself down to a block of wood ?" 

20 Who taketh delight in combustible idols 12 

Is led far astray by delusion of heart : 
He cannot deliver himself, and confess 
That his hand has been grasping an utter delusion. 

Let the World Rejoice over Israel's Redemption 

21 Remember these things, 13 O Jacob ; 

Yea, Israel, for thou art My Servant. 
I made thee, My Servant art thou ; 
O Israel, thou must not renounce Me. 

22 I blot out thy sins as a mist, 

As a thick dark cloud thy transgressions ; 
Return unto Me, for I have redeemed thee. 



Isaiah 

23 Rejoice, O ye heavens, for Jehovah hath wrought it ; 

And shout, O ye depths of the earth. 
Break forth into jubilant cries, ye mountains ; 

Thou forest, and all the trees therein. 
For Jehovah hath now wrought redemption for 
Jacob, 

He showeth His glory in Israel. 

CYRUS AND THE OVERTHROW OF BABYLON (xliv. 24-xlviH. 22) 

Jehovah Calls Cyrus and Bestows upon Him a Career 
of* Victory, for Israel and the World's Sake 

24 Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, 

Who formed thee from the womb : 
I am Jehovah, Creator of all things, 
That stretched forth the heavens alone, 
And spread out the earth by Myself ; 

25 That frustrateth the omens of soothsayers, 14 

Making diviners like fools, 
Thrusting the wise to the background, 
And turning their science to folly ; 

26 But the words that My servants have spoken I 

confirm, 

And the purpose My messengers urge I fulfil. 
For I say of Jerusalem, " Thou shalt be peopled, 16 
280 The Temple foundations shall yet be laid : 

26 The cities of Judah shall yet be rebuilt, 

And the ruins thereof I will raise again." 

27 I will say to the deep, 16 " Be dry ; 

For all thy floods I will wither." 
28a Cyrus I name as My friend, 17 
b He shall execute all My purpose. 
135 



Isaiah 

xlv. 

1 Thus saith the (true) God, 1 Jehovah, 

To Cyrus His Anointed, 3 
Whose hand I hold in Mine, 

To bring down nations before him, 
To open doors before him, 

And gates to be closed no more : 

2 "I will go in person before thee, 

And mountains 3 I will level ; 
I will shiver the doors of bronze, 
And cleave bars of iron in sunder. 

3 I will give thee the dark-hidden treasures, 

In secret places hoarded, 
That so thou mayest learn that I am Jehovah, 
The God of Israel, who called thee by name. 

4 For the sake of Jacob My Servant, 

And Israel My Chosen, 
I called thee by thy name : 

Though thou knewest Me not, I rejoiced in 4 
thee. 

5 I am Jehovah, and there is no other ; 

Beside Me is no god at all. 

le The loins of kings I ungird ; 

5c But thee will I gird, though thou knewest Me not ; 

6 That men from the sunrise and sunset 

May know there is none beside Me. 
I am Jehovah, and there is no other, 

7 The Maker of light, the Creator of darkness, 
The Maker of weal, the Creator of woe : 

It is I, Jehovah, that doeth all this." 
136 



Isaiah 

Ye heavens, pour down your showers, 
Let victory 5 rain from the skies. 

Let the earth open (her womb) 
And bring forth the fruit of deliverance. 

Let victory blossom therein : 

It is all My creation, Jehovah's creation. 



Murmurs against Cyrus Rebuked 

9 Woe unto him that doth strive with his Maker 

A potsherd no better than earthen potsherd. 
Doth the clay say to the potter," 
" What thing is this that thou makest ?" 
Doth the vessel he wrought exclaim, 
" What a handless person thou art 1" ' 

10 Woe to the son who saith, 

" Sire, what is this thou begettest ?" 
Or " Mother, what bringest thou forth ? " 

11 Thus saith the (true) God, 7 Jehovah, 

Israel's Maker and Holy One : 
Would ye ask Me of things to come, 

Or command Me as touching My handiwork ? 8 

12 It was I the Maker of earth, 

The Creator of man upon it, 
Whose hands stretched out the heavens, 
And on all their host laid charge 

13 It was I who of purpose 9 aroused him, 10 

And all his ways I smoothe : 
He it is that shall build My city, 

And set Mine exiles free ; 
Yet neither for price nor reward. 

Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts. 
137 



Isaiah 

The Heathen Acknowledge the Uniqueness of Israel 
and Her God 

14 Thus saith Jehovah of Hosts : u 

The peasants 13 of Egypt, the merchants of Cush, 

And the giant men of Seba, 
Shall pass in procession as lieges before thee, 

And walk behind thee in chains. 
They shall bow to thee prostrate, and thus they 

shall pray to thee : 
" God is with thee alone, 

There is no other god at all : 

15 Yea, truly with thee God hideth Himself ; 

Yea, Israel's God is a Saviour." 

1 6 Ashamed and confounded together 

Are all who have risen up against Him 13 
The idol-making craftsmen. 

17 But Israel is saved by Jehovah 

With salvation everlasting : 
Ye shall not be ashamed or confounded 
For ever and evermore. 



Jehovah Desires the Salvation of the Whole World 

18 For thus saith Jehovah, God indeed, 

Creator of the heavens, 
Who made the earth and fashioned it, 

And also fixed it fast, 
Creating it not for a desert, 

But fashioning it for man's home: 
" I am Jehovah, and there is none other. 
138 



Isaiah 

19 Not in secret spake I, 

Nor in any land of darkness ; 
The offspring of Jacob I asked not 

To go in vain quest of Me. 
I am Jehovah, My words are true, 

And straight are My proclamations. 

20 Come, ye that survive of the nations, 

Assemble, 14 draw near together. 
No shred of sense have they 

That carry an image of wood, 16 
And make their prayers to a god 

Who is impotent to save. 

21 Declare and bring forward (your case), 

Yea, let them take counsel together : 
Who hath announced this of old, 18 

Or declared it in days gone by ? 
Is it not I, Jehovah ? 

There is no other god beside Me 
A righteous God, and a Saviour, 

And none there is beside Me. 

22 Look unto Me and be saved, 

All ye ends of the earth ; 
For I am God, and there is no other. 

23 By Mine own self have I sworn 
That to Me every knee shall bow, 

Every tongue shall swear allegiance, 

24 And own that Jehovah alone 

Is the Giver of strength and of victory." 
All that were furious against Him 
Shall come unto Him with shame ; 
139 



Isaiah 

25 But all the descendants of Israel 

Shall triumph and boast in Jehovah* 



The Downfall of Babylon's Gods 
xlvi. 

1 Bel 1 boweth down, Nebo 1 stoopeth : 

Consigned are their idols to beasts 
On weary beasts lifted and laden. 

2 They crouch, they are bowed down together ; 

Unable to rescue their load, 

They themselves are gone into captivity. 

3 Hearken to Me, house of Jacob, 

Ye of Israel's house that remain, 
All ye that from birth have been carried * 
And upheld since the day ye were born. 

4 Till old age I am ever the same ; 

Till your hair is grey, I will carry you. 
It is I that have borne the burden, 
It is I that will carry it still ; 
It is I that will carry and save you. 

5 To whom will ye liken or equal Me ? 

Whom will ye set as My peer ? 

6 They that freely give gold from a purse 

And that weigh in a balance the silver, 
Hire a goldsmith to fashion a god of it ; 
Then they fall down and worship it. 

7 They carry the load on their shoulder, 

And set it down on its base, 
Where it stands, in its place, unmoved. 
It answereth no man's cry, 

It saveth no man in his trouble. 
140 



Isaiah 

8 Reflect, then, and own yourselves guilty ;* 

Ye rebels, lay it to heart. 

9 Remember the things of long ago ; 

For I am God, and there is no other, 

Yea, God indeed there is none like Me. 
10 From the first I declare the issue, 4 

From ancient times things yet to be done ; 
I declare that My purpose shall stand, 

I will execute all My pleasure. 
n I have called a wild bird 5 from the sunrise, 

The man of My purpose from a far distant land. 
I will usher in what I promised, 

And accomplish the thing that I planned. 

12 Hearken to Me, ye faint-hearted," 

Who deem that your triumph is far away ; 

13 The triumph I bring you is near, not far, 

My deliverance shall not tarry. 
I will set the deliverance in Zion, 
And lavish My glory on Israel. 

The Downfall of Babylon 
xlvii. 

1 Come down, and sit in the dust, 

O virgin daughter of Babylon ; 
Sit on the ground unthroned, 

O daughter of the Chaldeans : 
For thou shalt be called no more 

The Tender and the Dainty. 

2 Take mill- stones, and grind the meal ; l 

And put thy veil aside. 
Strip off thy skirt, and pass 

Bare-legged through the rivers. 
141 



Isaiah 

Let thy nakedness be uncovered, 

And let thy shame be seen. 
For vengeance I will take, 

Irrevocable vengeance 2 
Thus saith our Redeemer, 

Jehovah of Hosts is His name, 

The Holy One of Israel. 

Sit in silence and shrouded in darkness, 

O daughter of the Chaldeans ; 
For thou shalt be called no more 

The Mistress of Dominions. 
True, I was wroth with My people, 

My heritage I profaned ; 
And I gave them into thy hand, 

But thou showedst no pity upon them 
Thou laidest upon the aged 

Thine exceeding heavy yoke. 
Thou saidst, u I shall live for ever, 

And be Mistress evermore ; " 
These things thou didst lay not to heart, 

Nor didst think how it all would end. 

Hear this now, Lady of pleasure, 

Who sittest so securely, 
And sayest in thy heart, 
" It is I, there is none beside me ; 
I shall never sit as a widow, 

Nor know the loss of children." 
These two things shall come upon thee, 

Full swift in a single day 
The loss of thy husband and children 

hall suddenly 8 come upon thee, 
142 



Isaiah 

Despite thy many spells, 

Despite thine enchantments many, 

10 Despite thy trust in thy wickedness, 

And thy fancy that no one can see thee. 

Behold thy wisdom and knowledge * 
Tis they that have led thee astray ; 
And thou in thy heart didst say, 
" It is I, there is none beside me." 

11 So disaster shall come upon thee, 

Which no knowledge of thine can avert ; 
Destruction shall fall upon thee, 

Which thou hast no power to appease ; 
Sudden ruin shall come upon thee, 

Which thou hast no knowledge (to banish). 

12 Abide, then, by thine enchantments, 

Abide by thy sorceries many, 
Wherein thou hast toiled from thy youth. 
Perchance thou mayest somewhat avail, 
Perchance thou mayest yet strike terror. 8 

13 Thou hast wearied thyself with thy counsellors ; 

Now let them stand up and save thee 
Those men that divide up the heavens, 

Directing their gaze to the stars, 
And month by month make known 

What things are coming upon thee. 

14 But see ! they are all like stubble, 

The fire doth burn them up. 
Not even themselves 8 can they save 

From the mighty power of the flame : 
It is no glowing coal to warm at, 

No fire to sit before. 

J43 



Isaiah 

15 Such then have they proved unto thee, 

In whose cause thou hast toiled from thy youth ; 
They flee staggering, each his own way 
Not a man of them all to save thee. 



The Summons to Depart from Babylon 

The New Prophecies will be Fulfilled as Surely as 

the Old 
xlvm. 

1 Hear this, O household of Jacob, 
Called by the name of Israel, 

And sprung from the loins 1 of Judah, 
That swear by the name of Jehovah, 
And celebrate Israel's God 
But neither with justice or truth ; 

2 For they call themselves after the Holy City, 

And lean on the God of Israel, 
Whose name is Jehovah of Hosts. 

3 Of old I announced predictions, 

And uttered them forth from My lips : 
Of a sudden I wrought, and they came. 

4 But I knew that thou wast stubborn, 

With a neck like an iron band, 
And a forehead all of brass ; 

5 So I told it thee long ago : 

Ere it came to pass, I informed thee : 
In case thou shouldst claim that thine idol had 

wrought it, 
Thine images molten or graven appointed it. 

6 Thou hast heard it, now see it fulfilled ; 

Wilt thou not bear witness to it ? 
144 



Isaiah 

And now I announce to thee new things, 
And secrets thou hast not known 

7 Now created, and not of old, 

Things thou hitherto hadst not heard 

In case thou shouldst say " See ! I knew them." 

8 Thou neither hast heard nor known them, 

Thine ear was not opened at all ; 
For I knew thee for very traitor, 
Thy name was Apostate from birth. 

9 For Mine own name's sake I was patient ; 

Because of Mine honour I spared thee, 
And did not cut thee off. 

10 I refined thee, but not like silver ; 

I proved thee in furnace of pain. 

1 1 For Mine own sake, Mine own sake, I did it 

For how should My name be profaned ? 
And My glory I yield to no other. 

Cyrus Fulfils Jehovah's Purpose upon Babylon 

12 Hearken to Me, O Jacob, 

And Israel whom I have called ; 
I am ever the same, the First, 
And also the Last am I. 

13 It was My hand that founded the earth, 

And My right hand that spread out the heavens : 
When unto them I call, 
They stand forth all together. 

14 Gather, then, all of you, listen : 

Which of them all 8 hath declared this ? 
Who is it, pray, that hath brought him 3 
To work his will upon Babylon, 
His might upon the Chaldeans ? 4 



Isaiah 

15 It is I Myself who have spoken, 

And given to him his call ; 

I have brought him and prospered his way. 

16 Draw nigh to Me, hearken to this. 
From the first I spake not in secret ; 

From the time that it was, there am I. 
And now the Lord Jehovah 

Hath sent me, endowed with His spirit. 6 

The Blessings of Obedience 

17 Thus saith Jehovah thy Redeemer, 

The Holy One of Israel : 
I am Jehovah thy God, 
Who teacheth thee for thy profit, 
Who guideth thee the way thou shouldst go. 

18 Oh, that to My commandments 

Thou hadst but given heed ! 
Then thy welfare had been like a river, 
Thy weal like the waves of the sea. 

19 Thy seed had been then like the sand, 

And thine offspring as the dust. 
Thy name would nevermore 

Be cut off or destroyed from before Me. 

Forth from Babylon ! 

20 Forth, then, from Babylon, 

Flee from Chaldea ; 
With loud cries of triumph 

Declare this and publish it. 
Tell ye it forth 

To the ends of the earth : 
Say, "Jehovah hath ransomed 

His Servant Jacob." 

146 



Isaiah 

21 They suffered no thirst 

When through deserts He led them ; 
For them He made water 

To flow from the rock : 
Yea, He cleft the rock open 

And waters gushed forth. 6 

22 There is no peace, saith Jehovah, to the wicked. 7 



THE RESTORATION OF ISRAEL AND THE FUTURE 
GLORY OF ZION (xlix.-lv.) 

The Servant Discouraged, butat last Triumphant 

The Servant : His Seeming Failure and his Great 

Destiny 
xhx. 

1 Hearken, 1 ye isles, unto me, 

And ye peoples from far, give attention. 
Jehovah hath called me from birth, 

From the womb of my mother He gave me my 
name. 8 

2 Like a sharp sword made He my mouth, 8 

In the shadow of His hand did He hide me ; 
He made me a polished shaft, 4 
In His quiver He concealed me. 

3 And He said to me, " Thou art My Servant, 

In whom I will show My glory ;" 
5^ And so I had honour in the sight of Jehovah, 
/ My God became my strength. 

4 But I said, " I have laboured in vain, 

I have spent my strength on an empty nothing ; 
Yet safe is my cause with Jehovah, 
And my recompense with my God." 

50 And now thus saith Jehovah, 

Who formed me from birth for His Servant, 
To bring Jacob back unto Him, 

And that Israel to Him might be gathered 
148 



Isaiah 

6 He saith, " It is too light a thing 8 

To raise up the tribes of Jacob, 
And Israel's dispersed 8 to restore : 
I will make thee a light to the nations, 7 
That so My salvation may reach 
To the very ends of the earth." 

Israel's Happy Return and Restoration 

7 Thus saith the (true) God 8 Jehovah, 

Israel's Holy Redeemer, 
To him who of men is contemned, 

Abhorred of the nations, the servant of tyrants : 
Kings, when they see thee, 9 shall rise, 

And princes shall bow down in hotnage, 
Because of Jehovah the Faithful, 

And Israel's Holy One, who chose thee. 

8 Thus saith Jehovah : 

Now will I favour and answer thee, 

Now will I help and deliver thee ; 
Making thee pledge and symbol 

Of My covenant with mankind : 10 
Restoring the (ruined) land, 

And allotting the desolate heritage ; 

9 Bidding the prisoners go forth, 

And the inmates of darkness to show themselves. 

They shall pasture wherever they go, 

Ev'n on all the bare hills shall be pasture ; 
10 They shall neither hunger nor thirst, 

Neither sun nor the hot wind shall smite them. 
For One that doth pity shall lead them, 
And guide them to fountains of water. 
149 



Isaiah 

11 I will make all the mountains a highway, 

And roads shall be raised everywhere. 

12 Lo ! yonder they come from afar, 

Some from the north and the west, 
And some from the land of Syene. 11 

13 Sing, O ye heavens, for joy ; 

And earth, do thou exult ; 
Let the mountains break forth into song. 
For Jehovah doth comfort His folk, 
Taketh pity upon His afflicted. 

The Consolation of Zion 
Wasted Zion will be Rebuilt and Repeopled 

14 "But Jehovah," saith Zion, " hath left me ; 

My Lord hath forgotten me clean." 

15 Can a woman forget her babe, 

Cease to pity the son of her womb ? 
Yes, such may indeed forget, 
But never will 7 forget thee. 

16 I have graven thee on My hands, 

And thy walls are for ever before Me : 

17 In haste men are coming to build thee ; 13 

While those that have torn thee down 
And laid thee in ruins, shall leave thee. 

18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold 13 

How they flock to thee, all of them gathered 

together. 

Yea, thus saith Jehovah on oath, As I live, 
Thou shalt wear them upon thee as jewels on a 

garment, 

And bind them about thee as bride binds her 
girdle. 14 

150 



Isaiah 

19 For thy desolate wastes and thy ruined land 

(Shall be turned to a garden and crowded v 

men). 15 
Then scarce room enough shall thou have for i' y 

people, 
When those that devoured thee are far away. 

20 The children thou long wast bereft of 

Shall one day declare in thine ears, 
" This place is too narrow for me, 

Give me ampler space to dwell in." 

21 And then shall thou say in thy heart, 

" Who can have borne me these children ? 
Since I am bereaved and unfruitful, 16 

Who can have reared these children ? 
Behold ! I was left all alone : 

Who 17 then can these children be ?" 18 

* 

Three Words of Consolation 

At a Signal from Jehorah, the Nations shall Bring Israel 
Back to Zion 

22 Thus saith the Lord Jehovah : 

Behold I will lift up My hand to the nations, 
And raise for the peoples My banner (as signal) ; 

And then shall they bring thy sons in their bosom, 19 
And carry thy daughters upon their shoulders. 

23 Kings shall be thy foster-fathers, 

And queens shall be thy nursing mothers ; 
With face to the earth they shall do thee homage, 

And lick .the dust of thy feet : 
And then thou shall know lhat I am Jehovah, 

Who never will bring those who trust Me to 
shame. 



Isaiah 

Jehovah is Omnipotent 

24 Can prey from the mighty be wrenched, 

Or can captives escape from a tyrant ? 20 

25 Verily, thus saith Jehovah : 

Yes, ev'n from the mighty can captives be wrenched, 

And the prey of a tyrant escape ; 
But / will defend thy cause, 

/ will deliver thy children, 

26 And cause thine oppressors to eat their own flesh, 

And to drink themselves drunk with their blood 

as with wine. 
And then all flesh shall know 

That I am thy Saviour- Redeemer, 
Jehovah, the Strong One of Jacob. 

Jehovah's Omnipotent Love 
1. 

1 Thus saith Jehovah : 

Where 1 is the bill of your mother's divorcement, 

Wherewith I have put her away ? 
Or which of My creditors is it 

To whom I have ever sold you ? 2 
If sold ye have been, 'tis because of your sins ; 

Your rebellions have led to your mother's divorce. 

2 Why, when I came, was there no one, 

And none to respond when I called ? 
Is My hand too short to deliver ? 

And have I no power to rescue ? 
With a word of rebuke did I dry up the sea, 8 

And rivers I turned into desert ; 
Their fish dried up* for lack of water, 

Their monsters 5 perished on thirsty land. 
'5* 



Isaiah 

3 I clothed the heavens in mourning, 

And sackcloth I made their covering. 

The Servant Tried but Trusting 

4 The Lord Jehovah hath given me 8 

The tongue of a true disciple, 
To know how to answer 7 the weary 
With words (of consolation). 

In the morning He wakeneth mine ear 
To listen, as true disciple ; 

5 As for me, 8 I have not been rebellious, 

Or turned me backward away. 

6 I gave my back to the lash, 

And my cheeks unto those that plucked them ; 
My face I did not hide 

From insult or from spitting. 

7 For the Lord Jehovah doth help me, 

And so I am not confounded ; 
I set my face like a flint, 
And I know I shall never be shamed. 

8 My Vindicator is nigh, 

Who then dare contend with me ? 
Let us both stand up together. 
Who dare be mine opponent ? 
Let him draw nigh unto me. 

9 See, Jehovah the Lord is my helper ; 

Where, then, is the man that can worst me ? 
They all like a garment shall crumble, 
The moth shall eat them up. 



Isaiah 

Exhortation 

10 Let that man among you that feareth Jehovah 

Give ear to the voice of His Servant. 9 
Whoso walketh in darkness, 

With not a gleam of light, 
Let him trust in the name of Jehovah, 

And lean upon his God. 

1 1 All ye that kindle a fire, 

And ye that set brands aflame, 10 
Begone to the flame of your fire, 

Get ye into the brands ye have lighted. 
This is your fate at My hand, 

That ye lie in the place of torment. 



Words of Encouragement and Promise 

Deliverance is Near and Sure 
li. 

1 Hearken to me, ye that yearn for redress, 

That seek for the aid of Jehovah ; 
Look to the rock from which ye were hewn, 
To the quarry from which ye were digged. 

2 Look unto Abraham your father, 

And Sarah her who bore you : 
For he was but one, when I called him, 
Yet I blessed him and increased him. 

3 So Jehovah hath comforted Zion, 

Hath comforted all her ruins, 
Her desert hath made like Jehovah's own garden, 

Like Eden itself her wilderness. 
Therein shall joy and gladness be found, 

Giving of thanks and the sound of melody. 

'54 



Isaiah 

(live heed unto Me, My people, 

O nation of Mine, give ear ; 
For from Me shall direction go forth, 

Ev'n My law to enlighten the nations. 
I will bring My deliverance swiftly ; 3 

My victory is now on the way, 

Mine Arms shall judge the peoples. 
For Me do the islands wait, 

They shall set their hope in My Arm. 
Lift up your eyes to the heavens, 

And look on the earth beneath ; 
For the heavens shall vanish like smoke, 

And the earth like a garment (shall perish ; 
The world) 3 shall crumble to pieces, 

Her people shall die like gnats : 
But eternal shall be My salvation, 

My triumph shall not fail. 
Hearken to Me, ye that care for the right, 

Ye folk in whose heart is My teaching ; 
Be not afraid of the insults of men, 

Let not their reviling dismay you : 
For even as a garment the moth shall consume them, 

The worm shall consume them like wool ; 
But eternal shall be My salvation, 

My triumph from age to age. 

Appeal to Jehovah to Show His Ancient Power 
Awake, O Arm of Jehovah, 

Awake, and clothe thee with might ; 
Awake as in days of old, 

As in ancient generations. 

Art lliou not the Arm that hewed Rahab in pieces, 
And pierced the dragon 4 through ? 
'55 



Isaiah 

10 Art thou not the Arm that once dried up the sea, 

The waters of mighty ocean, 
That made the depths of the sea 
A way for the ransomed to pass ? B 

12 I, I am He that doth comfort thee : 

How then shouldst thou be afraid 

Of frail man that shall die, or of mortal 

That passeth away like the grass ; 

13 And forgettest Jehovah thy Maker, 

Who stretched forth the heavens and founded 

the earth ; 
And livest in ceaseless dread 

Of the fury of the oppressor ? 
Where is now the oppressor's fury, 

Who aimed at thy destruction ? 

14 Soon shall the captive be freed, 

He shall not end in death and the pit, 
Nor suffer for lack of bread. 6 

15 I am Jehovah thy God, 

Who stirreth the sea into roaring waves : 
Jehovah of Hosts is My name. 

16 And I put My words in thy mouth, 7 

'In the shadow of My hand did I hide thee, 
When I stretched forth 8 the heavens and founded 

the earth, 
And said unto Zion, " My people art thou." 

Jerusalem's Affliction : Her Speedy Redemption and Glory 

17 Bestir thee, bestir thee ; arise, O Jerusalem, 

Who hast drunk at the hand of Jehovah 
The cup of His indignation, 
And the bowl that bewilders hast drained to the 
dregs. 

156 



Isaiah 

1 8 Of all the sons thou hast borne 

There is not a man to guide thee ; 
Of all the sons thou hast reared 
There is none to take thy hand. 

19 A twofold woe hath befallen thee ; 

Who may with thee condole ? 
Wreck and Ruin, Famine and Sword 
And who may comfort thee ? 

20 Thy sons in a swoon were lying 9 

Like an antelope in a net, 
Filled full with Jehovah's fury 
And with the rebuke of thy God. 

21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted one, 

Drunken, but not with wine : 

22 Thus saith thy Lord Jehovah, 

Thy God who defendeth His people : 
" Behold, from thy hand I have taken 

The cup that bringeth bewilderment ; 
The chalice of My fury 
Thou shalt never drink again. 

23 I will hand it to thy tormentors, 

To those that afflicted thee, 
And commanded thee to bow down 

That they might pass over thee : 
Yea, thou madest thy back like the ground, 

Like a street for men to pass over." 

Hi. 
i Awake, awake, O Zion, 

Put on thy garment of strength ; 
Put on thy glorious raiment, 

O Holy City, Jerusalem : 
For never shall enter thee more 
The uncircumcised or unclean. 



Isaiah 

2 Shake thyself from the dust, 

And arise, O captive 1 Jerusalem ; 
Loose thee the bands of thy neck, 
O captive daughter of Zion. 

3 For thus saith Jehovah, 2 " For nought were ye sold and 

4 without money shall ye be redeemed." For thus saith the 
Lord Jehovah, " My people went down at the first to 
Egypt to sojourn there ; and Assyria oppressed them 

5 without cause. And now," saith Jehovah, " wherein have 
I been advantaged here, 3 in that My people have been 
taken away for nought ? See ! those who waited for Me," 
saith Jehovah, "are become a by word,* and My name is 

6 ever ceaselessly reviled. Therefore in that day shall My 
people know My name, that it is I who have promised. 
Behold, it is I." 

7 How fair are the feet on the mountains 

Of him that proclaimeth good tidings, 
The herald of peace and good tidings, 

That bringeth the news of deliverance, 
That saith unto Zion, 

" Thy God doth reign." 

8 Thy watchmen lift up their voices 

In jubilant cries together, 
For eye to eye 5 they look 
On Jehovah returning to Zion. 

9 Ye ruins of wasted Jerusalem, 

Break into singing together : 
For Jehovah doth comfort His people, 
He bringeth Jerusalem redemption. 

10 In the sight of all nations Jehovah 

Hath bared His holy arm ; 
And all the ends of the earth 
Shall see how our God hath saved us. 
158 



Isaiah 

i c Away, away, get ye hence, 

And touch no unclean thing ; 
Get ye forth from her, make yourselves pure, 
Ye that bear the vessels of Jehovah. 

12 Nor need ye go forth in haste, 

Nor depart as though ye were fugitives ; 
For Jehovah goeth before you, 
And Israel's God is your rearguard. 

The Humiliation and Exaltation of the Servant 
The Servant : His Sufferings and His Great Glory 

13 See, 8 Israel 7 My Servant shall yet be exalted 

And raised exceeding high. 

14 And as many were erstwhile appalled at his fate 

(And kings at his destiny shuddered), 8 

15 So many a nation shall yet do him homage 9 

And kings shall be silent for awe of him. 

For what they had never been told shall they see, 
liii. They shall gaze upon things unheard of before. 

1 *' Who 1 could have ever believed " (they 3 shall say) 

" Such a tale as that which we hear ?" 3 
And to whom hath the arm of Jehovah 
Been ever so revealed ? 

The Sorrows, Humiliation, and Death of the Servant 

2 He grew like a sapling before us,* 

A shoot out of ground that was dry ; 
No beauty had he to attract us, 
Hi. No figure to win our regard ; 
146 He was marred beyond human semblance, 
c He looked like a man no more. 
159 



Isaiah 

liii. 

3 He was spurned and forsaken of men, 

Familiar with suffering and pain ; 
As one from whom men hide their faces, 5 
He was spurned and we heeded him not. 

4 But ours* was the pain that he bore, 

And the sorrows he carried were ours ; 
Yet by us he was counted as smitten 
And tortured by God's own hand. 

5 But ours was the sin that pierced him, 

The guilt that crushed him was ours : 
Yea, he was chastised for our welfare, 
And his stripes brought healing to MS. 

6 We had all of us wandered like sheep, 

Each turning a way of his own, 
While Jehovah had laid upon him 
The iniquity of 7 us all. 

7 Though outraged, he was submissive, 

He opened not his mouth ; 
Like a lamb that is led to the slaughter, 8 
Or sheep that with shearers is dumb. 8 

8 He was dragged away by injustice, 10 

And who gave a thought to his fate ? 
He was torn from the land of the living, 
And smitten to death 11 for the sins that were 
ours. 12 

9 His grave was appointed with rebels, 

His funeral mound 13 with the wicked ; u 
Although he had done no violence, 
Nor was any deceit in his mouth. 
1 60 



Isaiah 

The Servant's Ultimate Exultation and Glory 

10 Twas the will of Jehovah that crushed him with 

pain ; 16 

But by yielding himself as an offering for sin, 
He shall yet see an offspring, his days shall be 

long, 

And the purpose of God shall through him be 
triumphant. 

11 For He hath delivered his soul from anguish, 

His eyes He hath filled with abundance of light." 16 
" In the sight of the many My 17 Servant stands 

justified, 
Theirs is the guilt that this man doth bear. 

12 For this he 18 shall win with the great an inheritance, 

He with the strong shall divide the spoil ; 
Because he had poured out his soul unto death, 
And had suffered himself to be numbered with 

rebels ; 
Though the sins that he bore were the sins of the 

world, 19 

And for those very rebels he had offered his 
prayer." 

r The Future Glory of Jerusalem 

1 Sing, thou barren, that didst not bear, 

Thou that travailedst not, break forth into singing ; 
For more are the sons of the woman forlorn 
Than the sons saith Jehovah of her that is 
married. 

2 Enlarge the space for thy tent, 

And stretch out thy canvas unstintingly ; 
161 L 



Isaiah 

Lengthen thy cords, and thy stakes 1 fasten well, 

3 For to right and to left shalt thou spread. 
Thy sons shall possess the nations, 

And people the cities now desolate. 

4 Fear not, for never shalt thou be ashamed, 

Nor put to the blush, therefore be not confounded. 
The shame of thy youth 3 thou shalt clean forget, 
And remember no more the reproach of thy 
widowhood. 8 

5 For thy husband is He that made thee, 

Jehovah of Hosts is His name ; 
Thy Redeemer is Israel's Holy One, 
The God of all the earth. 4 

6 As a wife forsaken and grieved 

To Himself hath Jehovah recalled thee ; 
Can a wife wooed in youth be rejected ? 
Thus saith Jehovah thy God. 

7 I forsook thee a little while, 

But in great compassion I will gather thee ; 

8 In a burst of wrath for a moment 

I hid my face from thee, 
But with love everlasting I pity thee, 
Saith Jehovah thy Redeemer. 

9 Like the days of Noah are these days to Me : 
As I sware that the waters of Noah 

Should no more pass over the earth, 
So I swear I shall never again 

Be angry with thee, or rebuke thee. 

10 Though the mountains should remove, 

And the hills be utterly shaken, 
Yet from thee shall My love never move, 
162 



Isaiah 

Nor My covenant of peace be shaken, 
Saith Jehovah, who pitieth thee. 

1 1 Thou that wast sore afflicted, 

Tossed by the storm and uncomforted, 

Behold, 

Thy base I will set in rubies, 
In sapphires thy foundations. 

12 I will make thy pinnacles jasper, 

Thy gates of carbuncle stones, 
And all thy borders of jewels. 

13 Jehovah shall teach thy builders, 5 

And greatly prosper thy children ; 

14 Through righteousness shalt thou endure. 
Far shalt thou be from oppression, 

Yea, thou shalt have nothing to fear : 
Far shalt thou be from destruction, 
It shall not come nigh unto thee. 

15 If 6 any should stir up strife, 

It cometh not from Me ; 
Who stirreth up strife against thee 
Shall fall upon thee to his ruin. 

1 6 Behold ! It is I who created the smith 

That bloweth the fire of coals, 
Bringing weapons forth for their work. 
It is I who created Destroyer to ravage. 

17 Success shall never attend 

The weapon forged against thee ; 
The tongue that is raised against thee 

Shall be worsted evermore. 
Such is the lot of Jehovah's Servants, 

And thus will I vindicate them, saith Jehovah. 



163 



Isaiah 

Invitation to Embrace the Impending Salvation 
. The Blessings in Store for Israel 

1 Ho ! all that are thirsty, come ye to the waters, 

And ye that have no money, come ; 
Buy ye and eat without money, 
Buy wine and milk without price. 

2 Why spend ye silver for that which is not bread, 

And your money for that which can satisfy no one ? 
If ye hearken to Me, ye shall eat what is good, 
And your soul shall be ravished with dainties. 

3 Incline your ear and come unto Me, 

Hear, that your soul may revive ; 
For with you I will enter a bond everlasting 
Of kindness, once promised to David and sure. 

4 For, as once to the nations I made him My Witness, 1 

Appointing him Prince and Commander of 
nations, 

5 So novvshalt thou summon apeoplethou knowestnot, 

People who know thee not shall run unto thee, 
For the sake of Jehovah thy God, 
The Holy One of Israel, 
Because He hath girt thee with glory. 

The Wonderful Salvation is Near: Forth, then, from 
Babylon I 

6 Seek ye Jehovah, while He may be found, 

Call ye upon Him, while He is near. 

7 Let the wicked forsake his way, 

And the sinful man his thoughts ; 
Let him turn unto Jehovah, 
And He will have pity upon him 
164 



Isaiah 

And unto our God, for He 
Will plentifully pardon. 

8 For My thoughts are not your thoughts, 

Nor are your ways Mine, saith Jehovah : 

9 But as heaven is higher than earth, 

So are My ways higher than your ways, 
And My thoughts higher than your thoughts. 

10 For even as the rain and the snow 

That descend from the heaven, return not 
Without having watered the earth, 
And caused it to bear and sprout, 
Giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater, 

1 1 Even so shall it be with the word 

That hath issued out of My mouth : 
It shall not return to Me void, 
It shall execute My pleasure, 
And carry My mission to triumph. 

12 For with joy shall ye go forth, 

And in peace shall ye be led out ; 
The mountains and the hills 

Shall break into singing before you, 
And all the trees of the forest 

Shall clap their hands together. 

13 For the thorn shall come up the fir, 

For the brier shall come up the myrtle ; 
It shall be for Jehovah's renown, 

For a sign everlasting that never shall perish. 



165 



LATER VOICES OF REBUKE, THREAT, AND 
PROMISE 1 (Ivi.-lxvi.) 

A Word of Cheer to Those who are in Danger of 

Being Excluded from the Church 
Ivi. 

1 Thus saith Jehovah : 

" Keep the law, and do that which is right : 
For soon My deliverance cometh, 
My justice will soon be revealed." 

2 Happy the man who thus doeth, 

The mortal that holdeth it fast 
He that keepeth the Sabbath unsullied, 
That keepth his hand from all evil. 

3 And let not the foreigner say, 

Who hath joined himself unto Jehovah, 
" Jehovah will separate me 

Most assuredly from His people." 
And let not the eunuch say, 
" Behold, a dry tree am I." 

4 For thus saith Jehovah : 

" The eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, 
Make choice of the things I delight in, 
And hold My covenant fast 

5 In My house and within My walls 

I will give them a name and a monument 
Better than sons and daughters : 
I will give them a name everlasting 
That never shall be cut off. 
1 66 



Isaiah 

6 And the foreigners joined to Jehovah, 

That serve Him and love His name, 
And are pledged to be His servants 
All that keep the Sabbath unsullied 
And hold His covenant fast 

7 I will bring to My holy Mountain ; 

And fill them with joy in My House of Prayer 
Their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices 

Shall be welcomed upon Mine altar. 
And My House shall be known by the name, 
' House of Prayer for every nation.' " 

8 Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, 

Who gathereth the outcasts of Israel : 
" I will yet gather others to him 

Beside those that already are gathered/' 

The Demoralization of Leaders and People 
The Sensuous Leaders 

9 All ye wild beasts of the field, 8 

All ye wild beasts of the forest, 
Come hither to devour. 

10 My watchmen 3 are blind, every one, 

With no knowledge of how to give heed. 
Dumb dogs they are, every one of them, 

Lacking the power to bark ; 
But there they lie a-dreaming 

In the slumber that they love. 

1 1 Yes, greedy dogs are they, 

That never can have enough ; 4 
But each to his own way turneth, 
Each on his own gain bent : 
167 



Isaiah 

12 " Come, wine let us fetch " (they say), 

" Let us fill ourselves with drink, 

And to-morrow shall be as to-day, 

A royal uproarious day." 
Ivii. 

1 The righteous are being destroyed, 

And no man doth lay it to heart ; 
The godly are swept away, 

And no man doth give it a thought. 
'Tis the wickedness prevailing 

That sweepeth the righteous away ; 

2 But he entereth into peace, 

And those whose walk has been upright 
Do rest at last on their biers. 

The Idolatrous People 

3 But you hither approach, 

Ye children of a sorceress ; 
Ye offspring of whore and adulterer, 

4 Whom are ye making sport of ? 

At whom are ye making wide mouths, 

And putting out your tongue ? 
Are ye not apostate children, 

A very brood of falsehood, 

5 That inflame yourselves at the oaks, 

And under each green tree ; 
That in valleys slaughter children 
Amidst the clefts of the rocks ? 

6 The slippery gods 1 of the valley 

Those, those thou hast taken for thy portion. 
Yes, to them thou hast poured thy drink-offerings 
And rendered an oblation : 
And shall I with such things be appeased ? 
1 68 



Isaiah 

7 And thou didst set thy bed 

On a high and lofty mountain, 3 
And thither thou didst go 
To offer up thy sacrifice. 

8 Behind the door and the door-posts 

Thy symbol thou didst set ; 
Inflamed, thou didst uncover, 3 

Didst go up and enlarge thy bed. 
And thou didst purchase thee lovers, 4 

Whose wantonness thou lovedst ; 
And didst multiply thy whoredoms, 8 

When thine eyes beheld the phallus. 

9 For Melech 6 thou didst anoint thee 

And multiply thy perfumes ; 
Thou didst send thine ambassadors far, 
Yea, down to the depths of Sheol. 7 

10 Though weary with many journeys, 

Thou saidst not, " I despair." 
But ever new strength thou gainedst, 
And therefore thou didst not desist. 

11 Of whom wast thou then in such abject terror 

That thou didst play the traitor, 
And gavest no thought to Me, 

Nor didst lay thy duty to heart ? 
I hid Mine eyes in silence, 

And Me thou didst not fear. 

12 But I will expose thy doings, 

This " righteousness " of thine. 

13 When thou criest, thy hateful idols 8 

Shall profit thee nothing, nor save thee ; 
The wind shall lift them all, 

And a breath shall take them away. 
169 



Isaiah 

But who trusteth in Me shall possess the land, 
And inherit My holy Mountain. 

Blessings in Store for the Faithful 

14 O raise, raise a highway, 9 and clear ye a path, 

Take the stumbling-blocks out of the way of My 
people. 

15 For thus saith He that is high and exalted, 

Whose throne is for ever, whose name is Holy : 
" On high as the Holy One sit I enthroned, 

And with him that is crushed, that is lowly in 

spirit ; 

To quicken the spirit of them that are lowly, 
And the heart of all such as are crushed to revive. 

16 For not for ever will I contend, 

Nor cherish Mine anger evermore ; 
For then would the spirits faint before Me, 
The souls that I Myself have made. 

17 Because of his sin I was wroth for a moment, 10 

I smote him in anger and hid My face : 
But he kept to the way of his rebel heart 

1 8 I have noted his ways," saith Jehovah. 

" But now will I bring to him healing and rest, u 
And requite him with full consolation. 

19 The lips of his mourners shall blossom with praise, 

When to far and to near I bring peace and 
prosperity. 

20 But the wicked are like to the sea that is tossed, 

And cannot come to rest, 
Whose waters cast up mire and dirt." 

21 So peace there is none, saith my God, to the 

wicked. 

170 



Isaiah 

The True and the False Worship 

Fasting 
Ivui. 

1 Cry with full throat and refrain not, 

Lift up thy voice like a trumpet ; 
Declare to My people their sins, 

And their guilt to the household of Jacob. 

2 Daily indeed they consult Me, 

Their joy is to learn My ways, 
Like a nation that doeth the right 
And forsaketh not the law of its God. 

They ask Me to guide them aright, 1 
They delight to draw nigh unto God. 

3 " Why lookest Thou not when we fast ?" (they say) 

" Why heedest Thou not our self-chastening ?" 
But on fast-days ye think of your business, - 
Ye drive all your workmen like slaves. 

4 See ! ye fast for strife and contention ,* 

Ye smite the poor 8 with your fists. 

Such fasting as yours to-day 

Will not carry your prayers on high. 

5 Can such be the fast of My choice, 

A day for self-mortification ? 
To bow one's head like a bulrush, 

To lie upon sackcloth and ashes 
Is this what you call a fast, 

A day that Jehovah accepteth ? 

6 Thus saith the Lord Jehovah : 4 

Is the fast of My choice not this 
To loose the unjust fetters, 

To undo the bands of the yoke, 
171 



Isaiah 

To let those that are crushed go free, 
And to snap each yoke in sunder, 

7 To break thy bread to the hungry, 

To bring the homeless home : 
When thou seest the naked, to cover him, 
And to hide not thyself from thy kinsmen ? 5 

8 Then shall thy light break forth as the dawn, 

Arid thy wounds shall be speedily healed. 
In front shall thy righteousness march, 
With Jehovah's own glory behind thee. 

9 Then, when thou callest, Jehovah shall answer, 

And say, when thou criest for help, " Here am I." 

If from thy midst thou removest the yoke, 
The finger of scorn and the speech that is 
mischievous ; 

10 If to the hungry thou givest thy bread, 

And the soul that is bowed thou dost satisfy : 
Then in the darkness thy light shall arise, 
And thy gloom shall be as the noonday : 

1 1 Jehovah shall guide thee for evermore, 

And thy soul in the land that is parched He will 

satisfy. 
Thy strength He will make new again, 

And thou like a well-watered garden shalt be, 
Like a fountain of water, whose waters fail not. 

12 The ancient ruins thy sons shall rebuild, 

Thou shalt rear once again the foundations of old ; 
And thou shalt be called the Repairer of Ruins, 
Who maketh waste places a home again. 

The Sabbath 

13 If thou turnest away thy foot from the Sabbath, 

From doing thy business on My holy day, 
172 



Isaiah 

And callest the Sabbath a sheer delight, 

And the holy (day) of Jehovah honourable, 
And honourest it by not doing thy wont, 

Nor heeding thy business, nor speaking idly : 
14 Then shalt thou have thy delight in Jehovah, 

And over the heights of the earth shalt thou ride ; 
I will give thee the portion of Jacob thy father 

In full to enjoy, as Jehovah hath promised. 

The Sinful People and the Divine Deliverance 

The Sins 
hx. 

1 Behold, the hand of Jehovah 

Is not too short to save, 
Nor His ear too dull to hear. 

2 Your iniquities are the barrier 1 

Between your God and you ; 
Your sins have hidden His face, 
And therefore He will not hear you. 

3 For your hands are stained with blood, 

And your fingers with iniquity ; 
Your lips have uttered falsehood, 
Your tongue doth mutter depravity. 

4 No one sues with integrity, 

No one with honesty pleads ; 
They trust in pretence and lies, 

Conceive trouble and bring forth mischief. 

5 Basilisks' eggs they hatch, 

And spiders' webs they weave : 
Who eateth their eggs shall die, 

And the egg that is crushed breaketh out as a 
viper. 

173 



Isaiah 

6 Their webs cannot serve as a garment, 

With that which they fabricate 2 no man can 

clothe himself ; 

For evil is what they fabricate, 
Their hands work deeds of violence. 

7 Their feet run to evil, 

They haste to shed innocent blood ; 
Their thoughts are thoughts of mischief 
Their paths are Wreck and Ruin. 

8 The ways of peace they know not, 

No justice is in their tracks : 
For their own selfish ends they have twisted their 

paths ; 
Who treadeth thereon is a stranger to peace. 

The Confession 

9 For this cause our right remains far, 

And no victory yet overtakes us ; 
We look for the light, but lo ! darkness 
For brightness, but walk in the gloom. 

10 We grope, like the blind, by the wall, 

Yea, like men that are sightless we grope ; 
We stumble at noon as in twilight, 
In darkness we dwell like the dead. 3 

11 We all of us roar like bears, 

Like doves we sadly mourn ; 
We look but in vain for justice, 
Salvation is far away. 

12 Our transgressions before Thee are many, 

Our sins do witness against us, 
Our transgressions are ever with us, 
We know our iniquities well 
174 



Isaiah 

13 Rebellion, denial of Jehovah, 

And turning away from our God, 
Speaking revolt and perverseness, 
And uttering* lies from the heart. 

14 Justice is driven back, 

And righteousness standeth afar ; 
In the market-place truth doth stumble, 
And rectitude cannot enter. 

15 So truth is not to be found, 

And insight departs from the city. 8 
At the sight was Jehovah displeased, 
He was angry that justice was lacking. 



The Deliverance 

16 He saw with utter amaze 

Not a man to interpose ; 
So His own arm wrought Him deliverance, 
His righteous might upheld Him. 

17 He put on the breastplate of righteousness, 

On His head the helm of salvation ; 
He put on the garments of vengeance, 
In the mantle of passion He clothed Him. 

18 He rendereth recompense matching desert 

Wrath to His enemies, shame to His foes : 

19 So shall those in the west fear the name of Jehovah, 

And those at the sunrise behold His glory. 
He shall come like a pent-up stream, 
Which the breath of Jehovah driveth. 

20 But to Zion He conies as Redeemer, 

And removeth transgressors from Jacob. 7 
175 



Isaiah 

21 This covenant with them that I make, saith 

Jehovah 
My spirit that is upon thee, 

And the words I have put in thy mouth- 
Shall not depart from thy mouth, 

Nor from the mouth of thy children, 
Nor yet from the mouth of thy children's children, 
Saith Jehovah, from henceforth and evermore. 

The Glory of the New Jerusalem 
Ix. 

1 Arise, shine, for thy light is now come, 

And on thee is Jehovah's own glory arisen. 

2 For, though darkness doth cover the earth, 

And the nations are wrapped in gloom, 
Yet on thee doth Jehovah shine forth, 
Over thee doth His glory appear. 

3 And nations shall come to the light that thou 

sheddest, 

And kings to the brightness that streameth from 
thee. 

4 Lift up thine eyes round about and behold 1 

How they flock to thee, all of them gathered 

together 
Thy sons coming in from afar, 

On the arms of their nurses 3 thy daughters. 

5 At the sight of them thou shalt be radiant, 

Thy heart shall tremble and throb ; 
For the wealth of the sea shall be turned unto thee, 
Unto thee shall the nations come in with their 
treasures. 

6 A stream of camels shall cover thee, 

Young camels of Midian and Ephah ; 
176 



Isaiah 

All those of Sheba 3 shall come, 

Laden with gold and frankincense, 
And tell of Jehovah's renown. 

7 All the flocks of Kedar 

Shall gather unto thee, 
And the rams of Nebaioth* shall seek thee ; 
They shall mount with acceptance Mine altar, 
And my House of Prayer 6 shall be radiant with 
beauty. 

8 Who are these 8 that fly like a cloud, 

Or like doves to their latticed cotes ? 

9 For ships 7 unto Me are gathering 

Vessels of Tarshish in front 
To bring thy sons from afar, 

And with them their silver and gold, 
To the name of Jehovah thy God, 

To the Holy One of Israel, 

Because He hath girt thee with glory. 

10 Strangers shall build thy walls, 

And their kings unto thee shall be ministers ; 
For the wrath that moved Me to smite thee 
Is turned into favour and pity. 

11 Thy gates shall ever be open, 

Not shut by day or night, 
That the wealth of nations be brought thee 
Their kings at the head of the train. 

12 For the nation and the kingdom 

That serveth thee not shall perish : 
Yea, utterly waste shall those nations be. 

13 The glory of Lebanon 8 shall come unto thee, 

The pine-tree, the plane, and the cypress together, 
177 M 



Isaiah 

That the House where My holiness dwells may be 

fair, 

That the place where I walk 9 may be covered 
with glory. 

14 The sons of those that afflicted and scorned thee 

Shall come unto thee, all lowly bending, 10 
And give thee the name of " Jehovah's own City, 
The Zion of Israel's Holy One." 

15 Whereas thou hast been forsaken, 

Unvisited, abhorred, 
An eternal pride I will make thee, 
A joy unto all generations. 

1 6 Thou shalt suck the milk of nations, 

Yea, royal breasts shalt thou suck ; ' 
And then shalt thou know that I, 

Jehovah, am thy Saviour, 
And He that doth redeem thee 

Is the Mighty One of Jacob. 

17 For brass I will bring in gold, 

And silver instead of iron, 
Brass in the place of wood, 

And iron in place of stones ; 
And Peace I will set to govern thee, 

And Justice 11 to be thy lord. 

18 Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, 

Nor rapine nor ruin within thy borders ; 

But a Sure Defence thou shalt call thy walls, 

And thy gates thou shalt name Renown. 

19 The sun shall no more be thy light by day, 

Nor yet shall the moon shed her brightness upon 
thee ; 

178 



Isaiah 

But Jehovah shall be thine eternal Light, 
And thy God shall be thy glory. 

20 Thy sun shall set no more, 

Thy moon shall wane no more ; 
For Jehovah shall be thine eternal Light, 
And the days of thy grief shall be ended. 

21 Thy people shall all be righteous, 

Possessing the land for ever, 
The shoot of Jehovah's planting, 
The work of His hands, for His glory. 

22 The smallest shall grow to a clan, 

And the least to a mighty nation. 
I (who have promised), Jehovah, 
Will hasten it in its time. 

The Proclamation of Zion's Redemption 
Ixi. 

1 The spirit of Jehovah the Lord is upon me, 

Because I have been by Jehovah anointed : 
He hath sent me to bring glad news to the wretched, 

To bind up hearts that are broken, 
To proclaim release unto captives, 

And freedom to men in bonds, 

2 To proclaim the year of Jehovah's favour, 

And the day of our God's revenge, 
To comfort all that mourn, 

3 To give 1 them a garland 2 for ashes, 

The oil of joy for the garment of mourning, 
A song of praise for a spirit bedimmed ; 

And oak-trees of righteousness they shall be called, 
The plants of Jehovah reflecting His glory. 

4 They shall build the ancient ruins, 

Restoring the places long desolate, 
179 



Isaiah 

Renewing the wasted cities, 
That age upon age have been desolate. 

5 Strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, 

And aliens shall be your ploughmen and vine- 
dressers : 

6 But ye shall be called The Priests of Jehovah, 

The name ye shall bear shall be Ministers of our 

God. 

The wealth of the nations shall be yours to enjoy, 
Ye shall deck yourselves with their splendour. 

7 A twofold measure of shame hath been theirs, 

And theirs was a lot of contempt and insult, 8 
So now in their own land their share shall be double, 
And theirs shall be joy everlasting. 

8 For I am Jehovah, the lover of justice, 

Iniquitous plunder is hateful to Me ; 
Faithfully then their reward I will give them, 
And enter with them on a bond everlasting. 

9 Their sons shall be famous all over the world, 

And their offspring among the nations ; 
Then those that behold them shall all acknowledge 

That this is the race that Jehovah hath blessed. 
1 1 For as surely as earth putteth forth her shoots, 

And the seed springeth up that is sown in a garden, 
Jehovah the Lord will make victory spring, 

And renown, before all the world. 

10 "I 4 will greatly rejoice in Jehovah, 
My soul shall exult in my God, 
Who hath clothed me in robes of salvation, 

And decked me with mantle of victory, 
Like bridegroom that fixeth his turban 
Or bride that adorneth herself with her jewels." 
1 80 



Isaiah 

Ixii. 

1 For Zion's sake I will not keep silence, 

For Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, 
Till her victory issue forth clear as the light, 
Her deliverance bright as a burning torch, 

2 So that nations shall see thou art victor indeed, 

And kings, every one, shall behold thy glory. 
But thou shalt be called by a name that is new, 
Which Jehovah's mouth shall determine. 

3 Fair crown shalt thou be in the hand of Jehovah, 

A diadem royal in the hand of thy God. 

4 No more shall thy name be Forsaken, 

Nor thy land called Desolate more : 
But thy name shall be called My Delight, 

And thy land My Wedded Wife ; 
For Jehovah delighteth in thee, 

And thy land shall indeed be wedded. 

5 For even as a youth weds a maiden, 

So thy Builder 1 shall wed with thee ; 
And as bridegroom rejoiceth in bride. 
So thy God shall rejoice over thee. 

6 Over thy walls, Jerusalem, 

I have appointed watchmen ; 
All the day and night 

They never hold their peace. 
Ye whose task it is 

To keep Jehovah in mind, 

7 Take to yourselves no rest, 
And give no rest unto Him, 

Until that He establish, 
Until that He make Jerusalem 
Renowned in the earth. 
181 



Isaiah 

8 By His right hand Jehovah hath sworn, 

And by His mighty arm : 
" Never again will I suffer 

Thy foes to devour thy corn ; 
Never again shall strangers 

Drink the wine for which thou hast toiled. 

9 But those that have garnered shall eat it, 

With songs of praise to Jehovah ; 
And those that have gathered shall drink it 
Within My holy courts." 

10 Pass ye, pass through the gates, 

Prepare ye a way for the people ; 
Cast ye, cast up the highway, 
And gather out the stones, 
And raise for the peoples a banner. 

1 1 Behold, to the ends of the earth 

Hath Jehovah made proclamation : 
Say to the daughter of Zion, 

Behold, thy salvation is come. 
Behold His reward is with Him, 

And His recompense before Him. 2 

12 They shall call them The Holy People, 

The Redeemed of Jehovah, 
And thou shalt be called Frequented, 
The City Unforsaken. 



The Destruction of the Foes of Zion 
Ixiii. 

i " Who is this that cometh from Edom, 1 
In bright-red garments from Bozrah, 
So glorious in his apparel, 

Marching in fulness of strength ?" 
182 



Isaiah 

" It is I, that have promised deliverance, 
I that am mighty to save." 

2" Why is thy raiment so red, 

And thy garments like his that doth tread in the 
wine-press ?" 

3 " I have trodden the wine-trough alone, 

Of the nations was no man with Me ; 
So I trod them in Mine anger, 

And trampled them down in My fury ; 
Their life-blood besprinkled My garments, 

And all Mine apparel I stained. 

4 In My heart was the day of revenge, 

And the year of redemption 3 was come. 

5 I looked with utter amaze 

There was none to help or uphold ; 
So Mine own arm wrought Me the victory, 
My fury it upheld Me. 

6 In Mine anger I trod down the peoples, 

In My fury I broke them in pieces : 
Their life-blood I spilt on the ground." 

Passionate Prayer for the Divine Favour 
Thanksgiving for Ancient Mercies 

7 Jehovah's renown I would celebrate 

All His lovingkindness 
As befitteth the deeds that Jehovah, 

So rich in goodness, hath wrought for us, 

Even for the household of Israel 
Wrought for us in His pity 

And lovingkindness great. 
183 



Isaiah 

8 " Surely My people are they," He said, 

" Sons that will not prove false." 
And so He became their Saviour 

9 From all that did distress them. 3 

No envoy was it or angel, 4 

But His own very presence that saved them 
In His love and in His pity 

He did Himself redeem them ; 
He took them up and carried them 

All the days of old. 

10 But as for them, they resisted, 

And grieved His holy spirit ; 
So He turned to be their foe, 

And Himself did fight against them. 

1 1 Then (Israel) remembered 

The days of the old time, 5 (and said) : 
" Where is He that brought up from the sea 

The shepherd of His flock ? 
And where is He that set 

In their midst His holy spirit; 

12 That caused His glorious arm 

To go at the right hand of Moses ; 
That cleft the waters before them, 
To make Him a name everlasting ; 

130 That led them through the depths 

ly With steps that never faltered, 

I4# Like cattle that stray to the valley, 

136 Or horse on the open pasture ? 

146 May Thy spirit, Jehovah, guide us, 

As once Thou didst lead Thy people, 
To make Thee a glorious name." 
184 



Isaiah 

Passionate Entreaty for the Divine Forgiveness and Pity 

15 Look down from heaven, and behold 

From Thy holy and glorious palace. 
Where are Thy zeal and Thy prowess, 
The voice of Thy yearning and pity ? 8 

16 Though Abraham knoweth us not, 

And Israel doth not regard us, 
Yet art Thou, O Jehovah, our Father, 
Our Redeemer from of old is Thy name. 

17 Why dost Thou leave us, Jehovah, 

To wander away from Thy paths ? 
And why dost Thou suffer our hearts 

To grow hard and strange to Thy fear ? 
O return for Thy Servants' sake, 

For the sake of the tribes of Thy heritage. 

1 8 Why do the wicked make light of Thy holy place ? 7 

Why do our enemies tread down Thy Temple ? 

19 We are grown like to those whom Thou rulest no 

more, 

Who have never been called by Thy name. 
Ixiv. 

1 O that the heavens Thou wouldst rend and come 

down, 

That the mountains might quake at Thy pres- 
ence 

2 As fire setteth brushwood ablaze, 

As fire causeth water to boil 
To make known Thy name to Thy foes 

So that nations might tremble before Thee, 

3 While terrible things thou doest, 

Surpassing our expectations, 1 

4 Unheard-of from olden time ! 

185 



Isaiah 

No ear hath ever heard, 

No eye hath ever seen, 
The mighty deeds Thou wilt do 2 

For those that wait for Thee. 

5 O that Thou wouldst meet 

With those that are doers of righteousness, 3 
Those that remember Thy ways ! 
But behold, Thou wast wroth with our sin, 
And of broken faith were we guilty. 4 

6 We are all like men denied, 

Like a blood-stained cloth is our righteousness 
We are all like withered leaves, 

Swept away by the blast of our guilt. 

7 There is none that doth call on Thy name, 

Or bestirreth himself to lay hold of Thee. 
For Thy face Thou hast hidden from us, 
And delivered us up to our guilt. 

8 But now, O Jehovah, our Father art Thou ; 

We are the clay, and Thou art the Potter, 
The work of Thy hand are we all. 

9 O be not, Jehovah, exceeding wroth, 

And do not remember our guilt for ever. 
Behold, look, we beseech Thee, 
For we are all Thy people. 

10 Thy holy cities are now a desert, 

Jerusalem is accursed. 5 

11 Our holy and beautiful House, 

Wherein our fathers praised Thee, 
Hath been burned up with fire ; 
And all the places we cherished 
Are lying now in ruins. 
1 86 



Isaiah 

12 At things like these, O Jehovah, 
Canst Thou restrain Thyself ? 
And wilt Thou still keep silence, 
And afflict us very sore ? 



The Blessedness of the Faithful and the Dcom 
of the Apostates 

The Fate of the Apostates 
Ixv. 

1 I was ready to offer an answer 

To those that consulted Me not ; 
And to suffer Myself to be found 

Of those that had sought Me not. 
" Here am I, here am I," I said 

To a people 1 that call not upon Me. 

2 I spread out My hands all the day 

To a rebel unruly people, 
That walk in a way not good, 
But after their own devices 

3 A people who even to My face 

Continually provoke Me, 
Sacrificing in gardens 

And burning incense on tiles 

4 That sit among the graves, 

And spend the night in caves, 1 
That eat the flesh of swine 

And unclean 3 broth from their vessels 

5 That say, " Keep by thyself, 

Keep away from me, lest I infect thee." 4 
Such men are a smoke in My nostrils, 
A fire that blazeth for ever. 
187 



Isaiah 

6 Behold, it is written before Me : 

I will not, saith Jehovah, keep silence, 

7 Until I have punished their guilt 

And the guilt of their fathers together, 
Who have burned on the mountains incense, 

And dishonoured Me on the hills. 
So first their reward I will measure, 

Then into their bosom requite it. 

The Destiny of the Faithful in the Impending Judgment 

8 Thus saith Jehovah : 

As when new wine is found in the cluster, 
And one saith, " Destroy it not, 

Because it containeth a blessing ;" 
Even so will I do for My Servants' sake, 

I will not destroy the whole. 

9 I will bring out of Jacob a seed 

And from Judah an heir to My mountains : 
The land shall be owned by My Chosen, 
And there shall My Servants dwell. 

10 And Sharon 5 shall then be a pasture for flocks, 

And the valley of Achor" for cattle to rest in, 
For My people who have sought Me. 

11 But ye that forsake Jehovah, 

And forget My holy Mountain, 
That spread forth a table for Fortune, 7 
And pour out mixed wine unto Destiny : 7 

12 I destine you for the sword, 

Ye shall all bow down to the slaughter. 

For ye answered not when I called, 

I spake, but ye did not listen ; 
Ye did that which was vile in My sight, 

And made choice of the things that displeased Me. 
1 88 



Isaiah 

The Great Contrast 

13 Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah : 
Behold, My Servants shall eat, 

But ye 8 shall be hungry ; 
Behold, My Servants shall drink, 

But ye shall be thirsty ; 
Behold, My Servants shall be joyful, 

But ye shall be shamed. 

14 Behold, My Servants shall shout 

For gladness of heart ; 
But for sorrow of heart ye shall cry, 
Ye shall wail for vexation of spirit. 

15 Behold, ye shall leave your name 

For My Chosen to curse by : 9 . 
Behold, by a far other name 
Shall My Servants be called. 

16 He that prays in the land for a blessing 

Shall appeal to the God of truth ; 10 
And he that doth swear in the land 

Shall swear by the God of truth 
When the former distress is forgotten 

And hidden from Mine eyes : 

17 For behold I will soon create 

The heavens and the earth anew. 

The Glorious Fulitrc 
The past shall not be remembered, 
Nor come into mind again ; 

1 8 But men shall for ever rejoice and exult 

Over this My (new) creation. 
For behold ! I will straightway create 
Jerusalem a rejoicing, 
And her people an exultation ; 
189 



Isaiah 

19 For I will exult in Jerusalem, 

And in My people rejoice. 

No more shall be heard within her 
The voice of weeping or crying ; 

20 No more shall be found therein 

A babe of (a few brief) days, 
Or an old man who hath not completed 

The full tale of his days ; 
But he that dieth the youngest 

Shall have lived for a hundred years, 
And he that dies less than 11 a hundred 

Shall be counted a man accursed. 

21 They shall dwell in the homes they have built, 

Eat the fruit of the vines they have planted ; 

22 No others shall dwell in the homes they have built, 

Nor shall others enjoy what they planted. 
For the days of My folk shall be many 

As the days of the life of a tree, 
And the work that their hands have achieved 

Shall My Chosen enjoy to the end. 

23 They shall not labour in vain, 

Nor rear their children to perish ; 
For a race that is blest of Jehovah are they, 
And their offspring shall live by their side. 

24 I will answer or ever they call, 

I will hearken while still they are speaking. 

25 The wolf and the lamb shall then pasture together, 12 

And the lion eat straw like the ox : 
But the serpent its food shall be dust. 18 
None shall do hurt, saith Jehovah, or havoc, 
On all My holy Mountain. 
190 



Isaiah 

Doom Pronounced upon those who Purpose to Build a 

Rival Temple 
Ixvi. 

1 Thus saith Jehovah : 

The heaven is My throne, and the earth is My 

footstool ; 

What manner of house would ye 1 build Me ? 
What manner of home would ye rear ? 

2 For all this is the work of My hand, 

And these things are all Mine, saith Jehovah. 
But this is the man I regard 
The afflicted and broken in spirit, 
Who trembleth at My word. 

3 Oxen they 2 kill forsooth 

But men they also slay ; 
And sheep they sacrifice 

But dogs they also strangle : 
They offer their oblations 

But also the blood of swine ; 
They bring their memorial incense, 

But they also bless the idol. 

Such are the ways they have chosen, 
Foul rites are the joy of their soul ; 

4 So / choose that they shall be harassed, 

The things that they dread I will bring on them : 
Because, when I called, none responded ; 

They listened not, when I spoke, 
But did that which was vile in My sight, 

And made choice of the things that displeased Me. 8 

The Faithful Cheered by the Prospect of Zion's Prosperity 

5 Hear ye the word of Jehovah, 

Ye that at His word tremble : 
191 



Isaiah 

Your brethren, that hate you and loathe you 

For My name's sake, have said : 
" Let Jehovah show forth His glory 

That we too may look on your joy :" 
But they shall be put to shame. 

6 Hark ! from the City an uproar. 

Hark ! from the Temple it cometh. 
Hark ! 'tis Jehovah Himself 
Dealing recompense unto His foes. 

7 But she* hath brought forth a son 

Before her hour of travail ; 
Before her pains came upon her, 
Of a man-child was she delivered. 

8 Who hath heard the like ? 

Who hath seen aught like this ? 
Can it be that a single day 

May see the birth of a people, 

That a nation be born all at once ? 
For no sooner had Zion travailed 

Than she brought her sons to the birth. 

9 Shall / not help to bring forth 

What I bring to the birth, saith Jehovah ? 
Or shall I, having brought to the birth, 
Then close up the womb, saith your God ? 

10 O Jerusalem, rejoice, 

And exult in her, all ye that love her. 
Be joyful with her exceedingly, 
All ye that mourned over her ; 

11 That so ye may suck to the full 

From the breasts of her consolations, 
And drain to your heart's delight 
The milk ot her rich mother- bosom. 
192 



Isaiah 

12 For thus saith Jehovah : Behold, 

I \vill set prosperity flowing 
Towards her, like a river in spate, 

And the wealth of the world like a torrent. 
Your babes 3 shall be borne on the side 

And dandled upon the knees ; 

13 And as one whom his mother doth comfort, 

Even so will I comfort you : 

In Jerusalem ye shall be comforted. 

14 Your heart shall rejoice at the sight, 

Aud your bones shall flourish like grass ; 
And then shall men perceive 

How Jehovah doth love His Servants, 
And how wroth. He can be with His foes. 

15 For behold, Jehovah shall come like a fire, 

With chariots like the whirlwind, 
To render His anger in burning heat, 
His rebuke in flames of fire. 

16 For judgment Jehovah will hold on all flesh, 

By fire and by His sword, 

And Jehovah's slain shall be many. 

17 Those that devote themselves 

By rites of purification 
To (worship in sacred) gardens, 6 

With one in the centre to lead them 
That eat the flesh of swine, 

Of creatures that crawl, 7 and mice 

18 Their works and their thoughts, saith Jehovah, 

Shall come to an end together. 

Jehovah's Glory Annnounced throughout the World. 
The Complete Restoration and Perpetuity of Israel 

Behold, the time is come 

To gather all nations and tongues ; 

193 N 



Isaiah 

They shall come and behold My glory, 

19 And a sign I will set among them. 
And those that escape (the judgment) 

I will send 8 unto distant coasts, 
Such as have not heard of My fame, 

Nor yet have seen My glory. 
They shall tell to the nations My glory ; 

20 And out of all the nations 

They shall all your brethren bring, 
Unto My holy Mountain, 

To Jerusalem, saith Jehovah, 
As an offering unto Jehovah,

Like the offerings brought to the Temple 

By Israel in vessels pure. 

21 Some I will also take, 

For Levitical priests, saith Jehovah. 

22 For as surely as the heavens 

And the earth I create anew 
Shall abide, saith Jehovah, before Me, 
Your name and your race shall continue. 

The Fearful Fate of the Apostates 

23 From one new moon to another, 

One sabbath to another, 
Shall all flesh come to worship 
Before Me, saith Jehovah. 

24 And forth they shall go, and look

On the corpses of the men 
That have rebelled against Me 
Whose worm cloth never die, 
Whose fire is never quenched: 
They are held by all flesh in abhorrence. 

